摘要
随着计算机科学技术的不断发展，虚拟现实(Virtual Reality, VR) 技术以及增强现实(Augmented Reality, AR)技术的三维虚拟场景(3D Virtual Environments)已经广泛用于电商行业的AR试穿、虚拟看房、 在线家装、网络游戏等各行各业。相比于传统的2D媒体，基于3D模 型的三维场景可以让用户在完成更丰富交互操作的同时，获得更好地 沉浸式的体验。高质量的三维场景往往也意味着巨大数据量的三维模 型和纹理图片。因此，如何快速传输高质量的三维场景是一个巨大挑 战。
本文所提出的方案主要贡献包括：
(1) 对基于视觉分辨率和视点显著性的模型失真评估算法进行创 新。改进基于模型到视点距离和相对视线中心偏转角度这两个维度的 失真评估算法，增加基于距离和尺度的视觉分辨率作为评价标准，让 模型失真评估算法更加精确。同时加入了视点显著性信息，使得评估 方法更加符合人类的视觉特征。改进后的算法，减少了对用户视觉质 量贡献较低的模型传输，提升了对传输带宽的利用率，将更多的带宽 分配给那些能够提升视觉画面质量的模型，同时，更加看重当前视角 下显著性高的模型，从而进一步提升画面视觉质量。
(2) 提出了基于网格模型和纹理图片的联合优化方案。研究当前 用于纹理图片的压缩编码标准，并分析仅依据网格模型的简化率，将 纹理图片均匀地降采样到与网格模型匹配的纹理简化方案的不足。在 上述方案的基础上，设计了网格模型和纹理图片的联合优化方案，在 纹理图片简化时充分考虑纹理图片中不同块的细节特征，并对不同细 节特征的块采用不同的降采样系数，在渐进式传输系统中实现最优的 匹配结果。
(3) 从渲染管线岀发对用户相关场景中三维模型的兴趣区域管理 方法进行改进，增加了兴趣区域管理机制中视距参数来源，认为其半 径应与渲染管线中相机内参中的远剪裁平面相关，提岀了自适应的兴 趣区域。使得系统的兴趣区域划分更加满足真实的用户体验场景。
兴趣区域内的模型通过模型失真评估算法进行视觉重要程度排 序，通过纹理图片和网格模型的联合优化算法确定纹理图片的采样率, 依据兴趣区域的大小完成场景内容更新，完成了三维网格模型渐进式 传输方案的设计。
最后对所提出的渐进式传输方案进行了系统设计和仿真实验，并 与传统方案进行对比。结果表明在带宽资源有限的网络条件下，相同 时间内本文提出的方案可为用户提供视觉质量更高的三维场景。
关键词:三维场景;三维模型;渐进式传输;纹理压缩;网格显著性
DESIGN AND RESEARCH ON PROGRESSIVE TRANSMISSION SCHEME FOR 3D MESH MODEL
ABSTRACT
With the continuous development of computer science and technology, virtual reality (Virtual Reality, VR) technology and augmented reality (Augmented Reality, AR) technology have been widely used in AR try-on and virtual environments in the e-commerce industry. All walks of life, including house inspections, online home improvement, and online games. Compared with the traditional 2D media, the 3D scene based on the 3D model allows users to complete richer interactive operations while obtaining a better immersive experience. High-quality 3D scenes often also mean 3D models and texture pictures with huge amounts of data. Therefore, how to quickly transmit high-quality 3D scenes is a huge challenge.
Starting from the problem that large-scale 3D virtual scenes are difficult to browse in real time or require a long time to load, this paper proposes a progressive transmission scheme for 3D scenes based on the rendering pipeline. First, through the analysis of the rendering pipeline process, the interest management mechanism that is more in line with the rendering process and the calculation method of the optimal resolution of the 3D model are obtained, and the user's visual perception characteristics and the visual characteristics of the 3D model are organically combined to calculate the visual importance of the model. Through the joint optimization of the mesh model and the texture picture, the bandwidth consumption of the texture picture in transmission is further reduced. This makes the user's visual content and visual presentation experience better when the same amount of data is downloaded.
The main contributions of the scheme proposed in this article include:
(1) Innovate the model distortion evaluation algorithm based on visual resolution and viewpoint saliency. Improve the distortion evaluation algorithm based on the two dimensions of the distance fi'om the model to the viewpoint and the deflection angle relative to the center of the line of sight, and increase the visual resolution based on distance and scale as the evaluation criteria to make the model distortion evaluation algorithm more accurate. At the same time, the saliency information of the viewpoint is added, which makes the evaluation method more in line with human visual characteristics. The improved algorithm reduces the transmission of models that have a low contribution to the user's visual quality, improves the utilization of the transmission bandwidth, allocates more bandwidth to those models that can improve the visual picture quality, and at the same time, pays more attention to the cun-ent perspective The model with high saliency can further improve the visual quality of the picture.
(2) A joint optimization scheme based on mesh model and texture picture is proposed. Research the cun-ent compression coding standards for texture pictures, and analyze the shortcomings of the texture simplification scheme that only based on the simplification rate of the grid model to unifomily downsample the texture picture to match the grid model. On the basis of the above scheme, a joint optimization scheme of mesh model and texture picture is designed. When the texture picture is simplified, the detailed characteristics of different blocks in the texture picture are fully considered, and different downsampling coefficients are used for blocks with different detailed characteristics. Achieve optimal matching results in a progressive transmission system.
(3) Starting fi'om the rendering pipeline, we improve the management method of the 3D model of the user-related scenes of interest, and increase the source of the view distance parameter in the management mechanism of the interest region. It is believed that the radius should be related to the far clipping plane in the camera internal parameters in the rendering pipeline. Adapt to the area of interest. This makes the system's interest area division more suitable for real user experience scenarios.
The models in the region of interest are sorted by the visual importance of the model distortion evaluation algorithm, the sampling rate of the texture image is determined by the joint optimization algorithm of the texture image and the mesh model, the scene content is updated according to the size of the region of interest, and the 3D mesh model is completed The design of progressive transmission scheme.
Finally, a system design and simulation experiment were carried out on the progressive transmission scheme proposed, and compared with the traditional scheme. The results show that under the network conditions with limited bandwidth resources, the solution proposed in this paper can provide users with a three-dimensional scene with higher visual quality in the same time.
KEY WORDS:3d virtual environments;3d models;progressive transmission;unequal error protection;distortion evaluation
