摘要
Zigbee无线传感器网络是一种低速率短距离自组织网络。它通过终端传感器釆集和 检测环境数据，利用内部集成的微处理器，对数据进行处理，并通过多跳中继的无线通 信网络发送至目的节点。Zigbee网络由于自身的低功耗、低速率、低成本、易操作等特 点广泛应用于智能家居、工业控制等，被认为是当前国际上备受关注的、新兴前沿研究 的热门技术。
Zigbee传感网络通过无线方式传送数据，终端传感器多用于人不方便或不可达的地 方，如自然灾害检测、危险区域远程测控等。因此网络的健壮性是衡量Zigbee网络的一 个重要指标。本课题通过对Zigbee网络健壮性影响因素的分析，分别从路由算法、密钥 管理、协调器备份三个角度进行研究与改进，以达到增强网络健壮性的目标。本文的主 要工作内容包括以下三个方面：
1）	基于能耗均衡的低功耗自适应集簇分层型协议（Low Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy, LEACH）算法优化。LEACH算法作为层次型路由的代表算法，通过随机选 择簇头节点，将能量负载平均分配，延长网络生命周期。但LEACH算法是单纯随机选 择，没有考虑节点的实际状况。本文引入簇平均能耗、节点位置、通信距离等影响因素， 选择综合最优节点作为簇头，延长整个网络的生命周期。
2）	离网节点密钥管理机制改进。密钥作为Zigbee安全体系的核心部分，是研究者 的主要研究方向。但目前对密钥前向安全的研究相对较少，Zigbee的密钥泄漏问题仍不 受重视。本文针对离网节点的密钥管理漏洞，提出分级网络密钥更新机制和链路密钥反 激活机制，有效防止密钥泄漏，增强网络的安全性。
3）	协调器冗余备份机制。异常节点的自我修复也是网络健壮性的重要方面。协调 器是整个Zigbee网络的核心节点，一旦协调器出现异常，整个网络的通信将受到极大影 响。本文通过提出一种具有备份协调器的协调器异常检测及切换机制，降低了协调器异 常对整个网络的影响。将异常检测、节点掉网检测和休眠机制相结合，具有实现复杂度 低、额外开销小的特点。
关键词Zigbee LEACH协议簇型网络密钥管理异常检测
RESEARCH OF NODE MANAGEMENT IN ROBUST
ZIGBEE NETWORK
ABSTRACT
Zigbee network is a wireless senor network, which is short-distance and self-organizing with a low transmission rate. It can monitor, sense and collect various information through various integrated micro-sensors. Then the embedded systems of nodes will process and transfer the perceptual information to the user terminals in a multi-hop way. Zigbee network is widely used in smart home, industrial controlling and so on. It has characteristics of low energy-consuming, low cost and convenience of operating. It is considered to be a hot spot of research and become a current concern of the international community.
Zigbee sensor network transmit data in a wireless way. Terminal sensors are usually placed in inconvenient or unreachable places, such as detection of natural disasters, remote monitoring for danger zones. Therefore, Robustness is an important indicator of Zigbee network. In this article, affecting factors of robustness is analyzed and the robust of network in the aspect of node management is improved. The main work of this article is as below:
1)Optimization of LEACH algorithm based on the energy balance. LEACH algorithm is a representative algorithm of hierarchical routing algorithm. It prolongs the network life cycle by randomly selecting cluster head node. However, LEACH algorithm is a totally random selection without considering the actual state of the node. This paper introduces an improved LEACH algorithm. It considers the average energy consumption of cluster, locations of nodes and communication distance. Then the best node is chosen as a cluster head node to extend the life cycle of the entire network.
2)Management mechanism of keys for leaving nodes. Keys are a core part of Zigbee security system. However research for forwarding safety of Zigbee network is far more than enough. Key leakage is not
taken seriously. This paper presents an update process of hierarchical network key and a rekeying mechanism of link key. The management mechanism can effectively prevent key leakage and enhance network security.
3)Redundancy backup mechanism of coordination. The self-healing of abnormal nodes is an important aspect of robustness. Coordinator is the core node of the entire Zigbee network. Once some abnormal situations of coordinator occur, communication of the entire network will be greatly affected. This paper proposes a mechanism for coordinator anomaly detection and network rebuilding. The mechanism combines anomaly detection with off-node detection. Utilizing dormancy mechanism can detect anomaly with low overhead.
KEY WORDS: Zigbee LEACH Cluster Key management Anomaly detection
