摘要
在当前时代，企业为了争夺市场、抢占客户，大打价格战、广 告战，竞争的激烈程度前所未见。随着高科技、互联网的高速发展， 企业开始尝试利用新兴媒介为产品或者服务大加宣传。有研究表明， 关于信息的传播途径对于消费者的影响，口碑比媒介广告高7倍， 比推销高4倍。在日益激烈的市场竞争环境下，企业倘若能够获得 良好的口碑，便获得了赢取回头客的重要法宝。因此，企业越来越 重视对口碑营销的使用，充分利用社交网络之间的传播途径，宣传 自己，为自己赢得更多忠实客户。
然而面对漫天而来的宣传广告，消费者表现的反而更加理性。 广告的宣传往往都是从企业的角度出发，遵从企业的利益，而口碑 信息的传播者却一般同样是独立与企业之外的消费者，因此，传播 者传递的口碑信息往往被认为是客观且独立的，为口碑接受者所信 任。所以消费者在购买产品或者服务前多会通过各种途径查找产品 或者服务的相关信息，既可以向周围的人进行了解，也可以求助于 万能的网络，搜寻其他消费者的评价。消费者在获取产品或者服务 的信息过程中，会主动的对信息内容进行判断理解，做出自己的评 估思考。
通过对已有文献的整理分析，学术界少有研究明确表明口碑的 认知需求与顾客忠诚度之间是怎样的关系。并且，本研究还发现， 满意度和品牌形象两个变量可能在其中会存在中介作用。因-此本文 以SPSS 20.0为数据分析工具，运用回归分析方法展开实证研究， 以手机行业作为研究领域，大学生群体作为被调查者，探讨口碑的 认知需求对顾客忠诚度的影响，以及满意度、品牌形象在该影响过 程中所起到的作用。结果表明，口碑的认知需求对忠诚度、满意度 和品牌形象均有显著的正向影响，满意度和品牌形象在口碑的认知 需求对忠诚度影响过程中的中介效应明显。文章最后根据研究结论 提岀了切实可行的管理建议。
关键词
口碑的认知需求顾客忠诚度 满意度品牌形象


THE STUDY OF MECHANISM ON HOW
THE NEED FOR THE
WORD-OF-MOUTH^ COGNITION
INFLUENCES CUSTOMER LOYALTY
-——ANALYSIS BASED O1NUPHE
MEDIATING EFFECT OF COSTOMER
SATISFACTION AND BRAND IMAGE
ABSTRACT
In the current era, the enterprise wages fierce price wars and advertising campaigns in order to fight for market, grab customers.佛th the rapid development of modem high-tech and the Internet, the enterprise begins to try to take advantage of the emerging media whoop to propaganda their product or service. Research has shown that on the route of transmission of information for consumers, the influence of word of mouth is 7 times higher than the media advertising and 4 times higher than the selling. In the increasingly fierce market competition environment, if enterprise can gain good reputation, it will win the important magic weapon to gain repeat business. Therefore, enterprise pays more and more attention to the use of word of mouth marketing, making full use of social network transmission between to propaganda themselves, and win more loyal customers.
But in front of advertisement, consumers show more rational. Advertising propaganda often comply with the benefit of the enterprise from the perspective of enterprise, and word of mouth information disseminator is generally the same independent consumer out of the
enterprise. Therefore, the message of the communicators of word of mouth is often considered as objective and independent one, trusted by the recipient of word of mouth. So consumers often find information about a product or service before buying, either through the people around you, or the universal network, searching for the evaluation of other consumers. In the process of getting information of a product or service, consumers will take the initiative to determine the content of the information to understand and make their own assessment.
Through the analysis of existing literature, few academic studies show clear relationship between the need for word-of-mouth's cognition and the customer's loyalty. Whafs more, this study also finds that the satisfaction and brand image may present the intermediary role. So this article investigates how the need fbr word-of-mouth's cognition influence customer's loyalty, and the role of satisfaction and the brand image in the process of the impact, using SPSS 20.0 tool fbr data analysis, regression analysis method on empirical research, in the mobile phone industry as the research area, college students as participants. The results indicate that positively influences customer loyalty, customer satisfaction and brand image. Even more, the mediating effect of satisfoction and brand image in the influential process is significant. In the end, this article proposes relevant management advices based on the study results.
KEY WORDS need fbr cognition loyalty satisfaction brand image
