摘要
在智能手机、平板电脑等设备以及社交网络、流媒体、在线游戏 等业务的驱动下，移动通信网络的流量呈指数级增长。在这种情况下 第五代移动通信技术(fifth generation mobile communications, 5G) 应运而生。5G的重要需求之一是容量1000倍增长，容量增长的途径 主要有异构组网、新频谱资源、高效传输技术等，其中又以异构组网 和新频谱资源对容量增长的贡献最为显著。而认知无线网络即致力于 解决这两个问题，以改善频谱利用效率、提升无线网络容量为目标。
认知无线网络可以获取多域(无线域、网络域、政策域、用户域 等)的环境和资源信息，即认知信息。在准确快速的认知信息获取和 传递的前提下，认知无线网络通过学习、决策和执行来重构网络参数， 通信协议，网络拓扑,甚至硬件结构，从而可以适应动态变化的环境， 提升认知无线网络的容量。具体到本文侧重的无线域的频谱资源，快 速准确的认知信息获取和传递是认知无线网络高效频谱利用的前提。 高效地接入无线域的空间、时间、角度、高度等维度的频谱机会是实 现认知无线网络高效频谱利用的重要方法。而容量提升是认知无线网 络高效频谱利用的目标。因此为了实现认知无线网络的高效频谱利用, 本文首先研究认知信息获取和传递，在此基础上研究多维频谱接入， 并且分析多维频谱接入带来的容量提升。本文主要研究内容如下：
(1)	认知无线网络中认知信息表征、度量和传递理论。
为了实现快速准确的认知信息获取和传递，本文研究认知信息的 表征和度量。首先研究认知信息的表征理论，针对空间和时间维度的 认知信息，使用“地理嫡”和“时间炳”描述空时频谱状态的不确定 性，使用“无线电参数误差”描述认知信息表征的错误率，并且分析 地理炳、时间炳、无线电参数误差的数学性质。其次建立认知信息度 量理论，使用“认知信息量”统一量化多维认知信息，得到认知信息 量与频谱利用率、系统干扰概率的关系，并将认知信息量应用于频谱 检测的参数优化中。最后本文基于认知信息表征理论设计快速准确的
I
认知信息传递方案，实现移动环境下的认知信息高效传递。
(2)认知无线网络空时二维频谱机会。
空时频谱接入可以提升认知无线网络的容量，但是在之前的研究 中空时频谱空洞的位置计算一直是个空白。本文为空时频谱检测和接 入设计了 "黑白灰"三区划分的架构。其中黑区只允许主用户部署， 灰区的次用户有时间维度频谱机会，而白区的次用户有空间维度频谱 机会。本文从理论上得到了三区的边界，获得了灰区和白区之间的过 渡区存在的条件，并且通过动态频谱租赁的视角得到最优的黑区半径。 最后，本文仿真展示了三区半径和系统参数的关系，并且验证了空时 频谱接入可以填补主网络的“容量盲区”，提升整个区域的容量。
(3)认知无线网络角度维频谱机会。
为了扩展认知无线网络的传输自由度，提升认知无线网络的容量, 本文研究认知无线网络利用角度维频谱机会的容量尺度律。本文首先 分析角度维度频谱机会的统计特性，得到角度维度频谱机会的概率密 度函数及期望。然后考察次网络利用角度维度频谱机会的情况下对主 网络的影响，基于此设计了主次网络的网络协议，以保证二者可以正 常工作。最后本文分析釆用方向性传输的认知无线网络的容量。这部 分的研究证明了：相比于利用空时维度频谱机会的情形，认知无线网 络采用角度维度频谱机会可以进一步提升网络容量。
(4)认知无线网络高度维频谱机会。
为了进一步提升认知无线网络的容量，本文研究利用高度维传输 自由度的认知无线网络容量尺度律，构建3D (Three Dimensional)认 知无线网络，以充分利用高度维频谱机会。本文首先设计了 3D认知 无线网络的网络协议，以保证主次网络正常工作。然后本文通过分析 3D认知无线网络的路由密度与干扰，得到3D认知无线网络的容量 尺度律，理论证明了：相比认知无线网络的二维部署，认知无线网络 利用高度维度的频谱机会可以提升网络容量。
最后对本文的主要工作进行了总结，并且对未来研究进行了展望。
关键词：认知无线网络，认知信息表征和传递，三区划分，方向 性传输，3D认知无线网络。
EFFICIENT SPECTRUM UTILIZATION METHODS AND
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS IN COGNITIVE WIRELESS
NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
Driven by the devices such as smart phones, tablet PC and the services such as social networking, streaming media and online game, the amount of mobile traffic is increasing exponentially, which gives birth to the fifth generation mobile networks (5G). One of the QoS (Quality of Service) requirements of 5G is the 1000X capacity improvement compared with 4G. And the approaches of capacity improvement are heterogeneous networking, new spectrum resources and efficient transmission technologies. The heterogeneous networking and new spectrum resources contribute most to the capacity improvement compared with other technologies. Note that cognitive wireless network (CWN) aims at solving these two problems, in order to improve the spectrum efficiency and capacity of wireless networks.
CWN can acquire the multi-domain (including wireless domain, network domain, policy domain and user domain, etc.) environment and resource information, which is called cognitive information in this paper. With the accurate and efficient cognitive information acquirement, CWN can reconfigure the network parameters, communication protocols, network topology and even hardware structure via learning, decision and implementation procedures. Thus CWN can adapt dynamically changing environment and improve the network capacity. In terms of the spectrum resource in wireless domain, fast and accurate cognitive information acquirement and delivery is the premise of efficient spectrum utilization. Efficient access to the spectrum opportunities in the dimensions of space, time, direction and height is the approach of efficient spectrum utilization. Capacity improvement is the goal of efficient specreum utilization in CWN. Thus in order to realize efficient spectrum utilization in CWN, we
in
firstly address the cognitive information acquirement and delivery in CWN, then we study multi-dimensional spectrum access, meanwhile, we analyze the capacity improvement of multi-dimensional spectrum access. The main contents of this paper are as follows.
(1)Representation, measurement and delivery of cognitive information in CWN.
In order to realize fast and accurate cognitive information acquirement and delivery, we address the representation and measurement of cognitive information. Firstly, we address the representation of cognitive information, which mainly focus on the space and time spectrum information. We use the notions of geographical entropy and temporal entropy to represent the uncertainty of space and time spectrum information. We use the radio parameter error to denote the represent error of cognitive information. Then we achieve the mathematical properties of geographical entropy, temporal entropy and radio parameter error. Secondly, we establish the cognitive information measurement theory, which measures the multi-dimensional cognitive information when the cognition is imperfect. We derive the relations between the cognitive information measurement and the system parameters such as spectrum efficiency and interference probability. Besides, we apply the cognitive infbnnation measurement in the parameter optimization of spectrum sensing. Finally, we design the cognitive information delivery scheme based on the representation of cognitive information in order to realize the efficient cognitive information delivery in the mobile environment.
(2)Space-time spectrum opportunities of CWN.
Space-time spectrum access can improve the capacity of CWN. However, in the previous research, the calculation of the locations of space-time spectrum holes remains blank. We design a black-gray-white three regions scheme for space-time spectrum sensing and access. Only primary users (PUs) are allowed to be deployed in black region. In gray region, secondary users (SUs) have temporal spectrum opportunities. In white region, SUs have space spectrum opportunities. We have derived the bounds of three regions theoretically. Besides, we have achieved the
IV
existence condition of transition zone between gray region and white region. And we have derived the optimal radius of balck region via the view of dynamic spectrum lesing. Finally, we have verified that the space-time spectrum access can fill the capacity gap of primary networks, thus can improve the spectrum efficiency and capacity.
(3)Directional spectrum opportunities of CWN.
In order to extend the transmission freedom of CWN and improve the capacity of CWN, we study the capacity scaling laws of CWN with directional transmission for the first time. We firstly analyze the statistics of directional spectrum holes and achieve the probability density function (PDF) and expectation of directional spectrum holes. Then we analyze the impact of SUs on PUs when the directional spectrum holes are utilized and design the network protocol of primary network and secondary network to guarantee the operations of primary network and secondary network. Finally, we analyze the throughput capacity scaling laws and connectivity of primary network and secondary network. The research in this part has proved that the capacity of CWN with directional transmission is improved compared with space-time spectrum access.
(4)Spectrum opportunities of CWN in the dimension of height.
To improve the capacity of CWN, we study the CWN with the hight transmission freedom for the first time. We have constructed the 3D (Three Dimensional) CWN to fully use the transmission dimension of height. Firstly, we design the network protocols to guarantee the normal operation of primary network and secondary network. Then we achieve the throughput capacity scaling laws of primary network and secondary network via the analysis of routing density and interference. The research in this part has proved that the capacity of 3D CWN is improved compared with the CWN with 2D deployment.
Finally we summarize this paper and present the future work.
KEY WORDS: Cognitive Wireless Network, Cognitive Information Representation and Delivery, Three Regions, Directional Transmission, 3D Cognitive Wireless Network.
