摘要
在当前的移动通信中，人们对数据通信的容量需求越来越大。 协作多点传输技术，又称为基站协作技术，已经成为了对抗小区间 干扰、提高网络吞吐量和用户公平性的一项关键技术。
本文对上行基站协作场景中的若干关键技术进行了研究，覆盖 了无线资源分配、功率分配、回传资源分配、协作策略选择等诸多 问题。除了理论上的分析外，还并针对若干子问题设计了低复杂度 的算法，并通过仿真进行了验证。
首先，对基站协作场景中的调度算法进行了研究，考虑了上行 协作调度场景中的载波资源分配、功率分配问题，提出了一种低复 杂度的联合调度算法，能够在线性时间复杂度内获取一个局部最优 解。并通过引入用户过滤、基站过滤、邻域基站集合等概念，进一 步加快了算法的收敛速度、降低了计算复杂度。
随后，对基站协作场景中的多协作策略组合问题进行了研究。 考虑了在一个协作集合内釆用多种协作策略，以有效利用用户信道 情况、回传网络等的不对称性，最大化协作网络的性能，提出了一 种启发式的多策略联合算法，用以自适应地根据信道条件、回传状 态的变化改变选取协作策略组合、分配回传容量。
最后，对基站协作场景中，回传容量限制等实际因素对协作干 扰消除技术的性能的影响进行了研究。利用马尔可夫链对误差的传 播过程进行了建模，并以此为基础分析了不同协作干扰消除技术下, 残余干扰的主要组成部分、概率分布，推导出了误符号率的闭式表 达式，并通过链路级仿真进行了验证。
关键词：移动通信；CoMP;基站协作；资源分配；协作策略选取; 回传容量分配
ON UPLINK BASE STATION COOPERATION IN
MOBILE COMMUNICATION
ABSTRACT
In current mobile communication, base station (BS) cooperation, also referred to as coordinated multi-point processing or transmission (CoMP), has emerged as a key technique to combat with inter-cell interference and improve the network throughput and user fairness.
This thesis investigates several key techniques in uplink BS cooperation, covering many basic problems including sub-carrier resource allocation, power control, backhaul capacity allocation, cooperative strategy selection etc. Some practical restrictions, such as backhaul capacity limitation, are also considered. Apart from theoretical analysis, low-complexity algorithms are designed and validated through simulations.
Firstly, the scheduling problem in uplink BS cooperation is studied. The subcarrier allocation problem and the power control problem in uplink coordinated scheduling problem are jointly considered. A low-complexity algorithm is proposed, which is able to obtain a sub-optimal solution with linear time complexity. Moreover, three concepts, namely neighboring BS set, user filter and BS filter, are introduced to further reduce the complexity and accelerate the convergence of the proposed algorithm.
Secondly, the problem of combining different cooperative strategies in uplink BS cooperation is studied. We consider adopting several decentralized strategies in a cooperation set to fully utilize the asymmetric channel quality and the backhaul infrastructure and maximize the network performance. A heuristic algorithm with polynomial time complexity is proposed to establish the combination of the multiple cooperative strategies, which consists of two procedures, namely strategy selection and backhaul capacity allocation.
Finally, the influence of backhaul capacity limitation on cooperative interference cancellation is analysed. The error propagation procedure is modeled with a Markov chain, with which the composition and probability distribution of the residual interference under different cooperative interference cancellation techniques are analysed. Closed-form expressions for the symbol error probability are derived and validated it with link-level simulations.
Ill
KEY WORDS: mobile communication; CoMP; base station cooperation; resource allocation; cooperative strategy selection;backhaul capacity allocation

