摘要
设备到设备(Device-to-Device, D2D)的通信是不通过基站转发在 设备之间进行直接通信的技术，由于它能够获得更高的频谱利用率和 降低移动设备的功耗，因此成为LTE-A的关键技术之一。D2D邻居 发现是D2D设备发现其邻近的其他设备的过程，是建立D2D通信的 重要步骤。其中资源分配方案对D2D邻居发现的发现范围、功耗、 发现率、发现时延等性能有着重要的影响。
本文详细分析了当前D2D邻居发现阶段已有的资源分配方案包 括随机的资源选取方案和基于能量检测的资源选取方案。对这些方案 进行了详细的分析和比较，说明了它们的优缺点。对于随机选取的资 源分配方案，本文提出了一个简化的分析模型，通过这个模型分析了 平均发现概率、发现时延与用户数、资源池大小、发现周期等参数的 关系。通过仿真说明了这个分析模型和实际场景的结果是很相近的。 基于分析和仿真的结果可以看出现有的资源分配方案对不同用户密 度场景适应性是很差的。
为了解决现有方案适应性差的问题，文本提出了发送概率自适应 调整的方案、基于时延性能的子帧调整方案和基于时延性能的子帧、 发现周期联合调整方案。发送概率自适应调整的方案可以在资源受限 的情况下提升邻居发现的发现率和发现时延性能。基于时延性能的子 帧调整方案和基于时延性能子帧、发现周期联合调整可以一定程度满 足时延敏感服务的需求或作为一种通用的自适应方案。其中子帧、发 现周期联合调整方案可以在保障时延性能的基础上实现最高的资源 利用率，从而提高频谱利用率。
针对以上的提出的分配方案，本文分别进行了详细的数值分析和 实际仿真，有力地说明了所提方案的正确性和有效性。
关键词：D2D,邻居发现，资源分配，自适应，时延
RESEARCH ON RESOURCE ALLOCATION FOR D2D
DISCOVERY
ABSTRACT
Device-to-Device (D2D) communication, which promises direct communication between devices without relaying via base stations, turns out to be a key technology for LTE-A, due to its potential in improving the spectrum efficiency and reducing energy consumption. In order to facilitate successful D2D communication, it is crucial to perform neighbor discovery such that all the potential neighboring devices can be efficiently detected. Specifically, resource allocation plays an essential role in D2D discovery procedure, since it directly affects system performance such as discovery range, energy consumption, discovery ratio and delay. To address the above issue, we explicitly analyze state of the art resource allocation strategies including random and energy detection-based resource allocation. In addition, we discuss their advantages and disadvantages in detail. For the random resource allocation strategy, we illustrate the relation between performance-related metrics(e.g., average discovery probability and discovery delay) and system parameters (e.g., the number of users, the size of resource pool and discovery period) based on a simplified analytic model. Numerous of simulation results validate the efficiency of the analytic model and reveal the poor adaptation capability of existing resource allocation strategies.
To this end, we propose three different resource allocation schemes. On the one hand, transmission probability adaption scheme is capable of improving neighbor discovery probability as well as discovery delay under the constrained resource circumstance. On the other hand, delay-based sub-frame adaption scheme and delay-based joint sub-frame and discovery period adaption scheme can provision the delay-sensitive service or serve as an universal adaption strategy to some extent. It should be emphasized that the joint sub-frame and discovery period adaption scheme can maximize the resource utilization while guaranteeing delay performance. Both numerical analysis and simulation results highlight the correctness and efficiency of the proposed schemes.
KEYWORDS: Device-to-Device, Discovery, Resource Allocation, Adaptation, Delay.
