摘要
自移动通信进入移动互联网时代以来，各种移动平台应用带来的 流量持续增长，这对移动通信系统基站的承载能力和吞吐量提出了更 咼的要求。作为一种减轻基站负荷、提咼网络整体吞吐的有效方式， 设备直通通信(Device-to-Device, D2D)被引入 LTE-Advanced 标准 中，成为4G对于近场通信的-种解决方案。然而，将D2D引入到 蜂窝系统的同时也会产生多种新干扰，异构网络干扰共存是D2D通 信研究中最关键的问题。
在此背景下，本文深入研究了 D2D与蜂窝系统干扰共存中的多项 关键技术，包括与干扰感知密切相关的物理下行控制信道(Physical Downlink Control channel, PDCCH)盲解码和 LTE 下行信道估计、 以及实现了干扰控制功能的D2D资源分配算法，并且对上述每项研 究内容都提出了经仿真验证的优化算法。本文的主要工作和创新点如 下：
第一，在基于最大累积度量优势的PDCCH盲解码算法中，针对 低聚合等级的PDCCH解码正确率较低且容易干扰算法对于聚合等级 的判断这一技术难点，本文提出了基于信号质量自适应的PDCCH盲 解码技术，消除了低聚合等级对其他聚合等级PDCCH解码的干扰， 同时也保证了在一定信噪比范围内低聚合等级PDCCH盲解码的正确 率。
第二，本文针对干扰感知中的另一项关键技术一一LTE下行信道 估计，创新地提出了一种基于滑动窗动态去噪以及虚子载波频率响应 (Virtual Carrier Frequency Responses, VCFR)添加的 DFT 信道估计 算法，仿真结果显示，本文提出的算法在多种低速信道中的性能都优 于巳有的同类型算法。
第三，结合实际的LTE系统环境，本文建模了一种新的D2D资 源分配场景，在此场景下，根据多对D2D用户是否可以复用同一段 资源将资源分配问题分为两类：单独复用问题和联合复用问题。本文 给出了解决单独复用问题的最优算法，接着给出了次优但具有更低时 间复杂度的贪心算法。针对联合复用问题，本文提岀了一种基于前述 单独复用问题的迭代算法。
关键词:D2D;LTE;PDCCH;信道估计;干扰控制;pdcch;d2d;lte
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERFERENCE COEXISTENCE IN HETEROGENEOUS CELLULAR AND D2D NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
Ever since mobile communication have entered mobile internet era, the net traffic comes from mobile applications continues to become heavier, which makes higher requirement on carrying capacity and throughput of cellular base station. Device-to-Device (D2D) communication has been introduced into LTE-Advanced standard as an effective way to relieve base station pay load and increase total throughput in network, and has become a solution to proximity communication in the 4th Generation mobile communications. However, a few new kinds of interference are produced while introducing D2D into LTE systems, which make interference coexistence technology a key point in the research of LTE-D2D heterogeneous networks.
The thesis conducts thorough research on few key technologies about interference coexistence in LTE-D2D heterogeneous networks, including PDCCH blind decoding and LTE downlink channel estimation which are related closely to interference aware, and D2D resource allocation algorithms which accomplish interference control function. In the thesis, improved algorithms for every research item are brought up and tested in simulated platform. The innovation points of the thesis are:
Firstly, based on the Viterbi path metric dominance PDCCH blind decode algorithm, a method refers to signal quality is presented in the thesis to overcome the difficulty in decoding PDCCH with low aggregation level. The presented algorithm on the one hand avoids bad impact on high aggregation level PDCCH decoding caused by low aggregation level decoding, and on the other hand assures the accuracy of low aggregation level decoding within a certain SNR range.
Secondly, the thesis introduces an improved LTE downlink channel estimation algorithm based on VCFR addition and slide window noise elimination. The simulation results show that the presented algorithm beats other traditional channel estimation method in different kinds of slow channels.
Thirdly, a mathematic model of LTE-D2D interference control suitable for realistic LTE systems is developed in the thesis. According to whether a resource block can be reused by more one pair of D2D users, the interference control problem is divided to two categories in this model: exclusive reuse problem and union reuse problem. The thesis gives optimal solution to the exclusive reuse problem, and a suboptimal greedy solution which is faster than the optimal one. As for the union reuse problem, an iterative algorithm based on exclusive reuse solution is presented.
KEY WORDS:D2D;LTE;PDCCH;pdcch;channel estimation;interference control;d2d;lte

