摘要
随着移动互联网、云计算、大数据等互联网技术的快速发展，网 络建设的规模不断扩大，新型的网络架构也层出不穷。为了增强网络 的健壮性，传统网络大都存在超额资源供给和冗余设计的问题，并且 当前网络设备还存在能耗与流量大小不匹配的问题，这都导致了网络 能量利用率低。为了解决网络能量利用率低的问题，当前解决的基本 思路是将网络流量限定在子拓扑中，关闭空闲的网络链路或设备。但 在传统网络中，由于获取网络的实时流量困难以及网络节能操作带来 了大量网络开销等问题，导致了网络节能和QoS往往不能同时满足。
OpenFlow作为实现网络控制功能和数据转发功能相分离的关键 技术，已经成为实现软件定义网络(SDN)的南向通用接口协议。 OpenFlow控制器大大增强了对网络控制的灵活性，这为实现网络节 能提供了一种新的思路。考虑到网络流量分布呈现出的普遍规律性, 结合OpenFlow技术在获取网络实时流量和拓扑、休眠或唤醒网络设 备，更新网络路由等方面的优势，提出了一种基于网络实时流量的节 能算法(Real-Time Traffic Energy Saving： RTT-ES)o 首先，该算法以 链路利用率作为QoS约束条件，对超过链路利用率阈值的链路，进 行负载均衡。然后，为了应对网络中的突发流量，又提出了一种基于 动态阈值的RTT-ES算法，该算法可以实时更新阈值以匹配网络负载。 最后基于企业级的网络控制器Floodlight和Mininet仿真平台，实现 了 RTT-ES的算法节能系统，并对RTT-ES算法性能进行了详细的分 析和评估。
关键词:OpenFlow协议;网络实时流量;动态阈值;网络节能;网络服务质量;openflow
RESEARCH ON NETWORK ENERGY-SAVING TECHNOLOGY BASED ON OPENFLOW
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of mobile Internet, cloud computing, big data and other internet technologies, the scale of network continues to expand and the new network architecture also appear endless. To enhance network robustness and respond to network burst traffic, the problem of excess resource supply and redundant design in traditional network as well as the mismatch between network equipment energy consumption and traffic volume result in low utilization of network energy, wasting large of energy. In order to solve the problem of low utilization in network energy, the basic idea is to confine the network traffic into the sub-topology then close the idle network links or equipment. But in the traditional network, the issue of difficulties in obtaining real-time traffic network and the network of energy-saving operation bringing a lot of network overhead and so on result in that energy efficiency and QoS can not meet at the same time.
OpenFlow as the key technology to separate the network control function from data forwarding function, has become the universal southbound interface protocol of software defined networking (SDN). OpenFlow controller greatly enhances the flexibility of the network control, which provides a new way to achieve network energy-saving. Based on the certain regularity of network traffic distribution, using the OpenFlow technology to sleep and wake up the equipment, obtaining real-time traffic and changing the traffic route, an energy-saving algorithm based on real-time traffic is proposed. Firstly, this algorithm uses link utilization as QoS constraint, and the link whose link utilization
exceed the threshold of congestion constraints need to do load-balancing. Then In order to cope with bursty traffic in the network, an improved algorithm is proposed which can update threshold to match the network load. Finally, the RTT-ES energy-saving system is realized based on the enterprise-class network controller Floodlight and Mininet simulation platform, and make a detail analysis and assessment to the RTT-ES algorithm.
KEY WORDS:OpenFlow Specification;Real-Time network traffic;Dynamic threshold;Network energy-saving;QoS

