摘要
随着无线通信技术的不断进步和移动互联网的发展，用户对于数据速 率的要求越来越高，现有的2G/3G网络不足以应对不断增长的需求。LTE 系统因其良好的向下兼容技术、较高的数据传输速率和频谱利用率，逐渐 受到全球的设备商和运营商的重视。
本文在3GPP物理层协议的基础上，首先对TD-LTE系统物理层的结构 进行了概述，介绍了 TD-LTE系统的两种关键技术：正交频分复用技术 (OFDM)和多天线技术(MIMO)；接着介绍了物理上行控制信道PUCCH 的发送过程，对不同PUCCH发送格式的基带处理过程进行了详细的描述； 然后详细研究了 eNodeB端物理上行控制信道不同格式下的检测与接收算 法，并对基于半盲检测技术的接收算法进行了优化；最后，利用Matlab软 件，搭建TD-LTE系统上行仿真链路，在EPA、EVA和ETU信道下，对检 测接收算法进行了误码块率的仿真，并且给出了误码块率的仿真图。在这 之后，我们在Freescale MSC8157多核DSP平台上对PUCCH进行了详细的 设计与实现。
本文的第三章集中讨论了检测与接收算法，来得到PUCCH传输的控制 信息。对于格式2/2a/2b的接收算法部分，本文不但研究了传统的接收算法， 还研究了基于半盲检测技术的接收算法(简称半盲检测算法)，在ETU 5km/h 和ETU 350km/h的信道下，半盲检测算法的性能相对于传统算法的性能， 大约有一个dB的增益。针对半盲检测算法计算量巨大的缺点,本文提出了 对半盲检测算法优化计算量的改进算法,使该算法在性能不变的基础上， 计算量降低到了到了原来的1/13或更低。
在对PUCCH的检测接收算法研究之后，本文在Freescale MSC8157多 核DSP平台上，对PUCCH进行了设计与实现。设il T PUCCH各模块之 间的接口，PUCCH与高层的接口，模块任务的划分以及模块的处理过程。 实现了在该DSP平台上PUCCH的系统功能。通过遍历多组测试向量，验 证了该系统的正确性与实时性。
关键词TD-LTE PUCCH半盲检信道估计DSP
RESEARCH AND IMPLEMENTATION OF TD-LTE PUCCH
DETECTION AND RECEIVING ALGORITHM WITH DSP
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of wireless communication technology and mobile Internet, the need of data rate requirements become more and more high, the existing 2G/3G network is not enough to meet growing demand. The LTE system is drawn widely attention gradually by equipment manufacturers and operators because of its good downward compatible technology, higher data transmission rate and higher spectrum utilization.
This paper is based on 3GPP physical layer protocol. Firstly, it gives a brief introduction of the struct of LTE physical layer and two key technologys: OFDM and MIMO. Then it introduces the sending process of physical uplink control channel (PUCCH), and baseband processing on different PUCCH transmission fonnat for different uplink control information is described in detail. After that, the detection and receiving algorithm for different PUCCH transmission format on the eNodeB side is studied, the paper also improves the semi-blind detection algorithm. At last, after doing research on PUCCH at the receiver and MALAB simulation, Freescale MSC6418 muti-core DSP is adopted to design and realization for the vital modules of PUCCH at eNodeB.
In the third section of this paper, we focus on the detection and receiving algorithm to get uplink control information. For PUCCH format of 2/2a/2b, this paper not only studied the traditional algorithm, but also studied the semi-blind detection technology. At the condition of ETU 5km/h and ETU 350km/h, the performance of the semi-blind algorithm has better performance than the traditional algorithm, it has about IdB gain. Aiming at the high computation of semi-blind detection algorithm, this paper put forward an advanced semi-blind detection algorithm which has lower computation. The computation is decreased to 1/13 or lower and the performance stays the same.
After researching the detection and receiving algorithm, this paper designed and realized LTE uplink channel on Freescale MSC6418 muti-core DSP. This paper designed the interface between PUCCH modules, interface between
PUCCH and higher layer, tasks allocation and processes of different modules, realized the function of PUCCH on this DSP. After showing the result of test, correct and real-time system has been verified.
KEY WORDS TD-LTE PUCCH semi-blind channel estimation DSP
