摘要
21世纪随着移动通信技术和移动互联网技术的快速发展，不同人类文明的知 识和信息在全世界范围内交汇、融通和发展。目前4G移动通信系统已经在世界 范围内得到普及，并被投入商业运营。4G通信技术具有数据传输速度快，频谱效 率高，兼容性好等优点，但是依然存在资源浪费，通信容量受限等缺点。根据近 几年的商业通信用户数量增加趋势，未来对于通信系统的容量需求将更加巨大， 移动互联网业务会呈现爆发式增长。由于这个原因5G移动通信技术应运而生， 目前5G移动通信系统面临的首要需求是大幅提高数据传输能力与系统容量。空 间耦合LDPC码是一种在理论上逼近香农容量极限的码，有利于5G移动通信系 统中系统容量的增加，同时它的编码结构也可以用于5G移动通信中的非正交多 址等技术中。
为了推动空间耦合LDPC码的实用化进程，目前对于空间耦合LDPC码实用 化的研究主要集中在编码构造方式和低复杂度编译码方案两个方面。针对与第一 个方面一种基于校验矩阵结构的构造方式已经被提出，对于第二个方面对应于特 定速率的低复杂度迭代编码算法也已经被设计出来。但是这种迭代编码算法只能 使用于特定的速率，并且为了解决迭代编码后的寄存器状态非零的问题需要消耗 较高的计算复杂度去计算添加的尾比特。鉴于以上个点空间耦合LDPC码是实用 化依然受到一定的限制。
为了解决这些限制问题，本文主要就空间耦合LDPC码的实用化构造方式和 低复杂度低延时的编码算法两方面进行研究。本文在传统空间耦合LDPC码的基 础上，提出了任意速率可迭代编码空间耦合LDPC码的构造方式及其编码方案与 有限码长空间耦合LDPC码的尾部结构设计方案。前一个方案可以解决任意速率 空间耦合LDPC码的迭代编码问题，后一个方案用来解决有限码长空间耦合LDPC 码尾部有效终止问题。本文还对这两个方案提供了对应空间耦合LDPC码在编码 速率和密度演进方面的性能分析，此外还提供了对应空间耦合LDPC码在二进制 擦除信道(BEC)下的性能仿真。
综上所述，本研究的贡献主要包括实现了任意速率的空间耦合LDPC码的低 复杂度迭代编码和有限码长空间耦合LDPC码的低复杂度低延时终止，从而降低 了空间耦合LDPC码的整体编码复杂度，在一定程度上推动了空间耦合LDPC码 在5G通信系统中的实用化进程。
关键词:5G;空间耦合LDPC码;实用化;迭代编码;终止
RESEARCH OF SPATIAL COUPLING ON 5G
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of mobile communication technology and mobile Internet technology in Twenty-first Century, the knowledge and information between different human civilizations, intersects integrates and develops around the world. At present, the 4G mobile communication system has been popularized in the world, and has been put into commercial operation. 4G communication technology has the advantages of fast data transmission, high spectrum efficiency, good compatibility, etc., but it still has some shortcomings, including resources wasting, limited communication capacity, and so on. According to the increase in the number of commercial communications users in recent years, the future demand fbr the capacity of the communication system will be greater and the mobile Internet business will grow explosivly. As a result of this reason 5G mobile communication technology came into being. The main demand of 5G mobile communication system is to improve the data transmission capacity and system capacity. Spatially Coupled LDPC code is a code which is close to the Shannon capacity limit in theory. It is beneficial to increase the system capacity of 5G mobile communication system, and it also can be used in the non-orthogonal multiple access technology of 5G mobile communication.
At present the researches on the practical application of Spatially Coupled LDPC codes are mainly focused on two aspects: the construction of the Spatially Coupled LDPC codes and the encoding and decoding augrithm with low complexity. In terms of the first aspect, a structure based on the parity check matrix has been proposed, while in terms of the second aspects the recursive encoding algorithm with low complexity has been designed. However, this kind of recursive encoding algorithm can only be used at certain design rates, besides, in order to bring the register to zero state after recursive encoding, some computational complexity will be sacrificed to calculate the added tail bits. According to the above points, it is still difficult to put Spatially Coupled LDPC code into practice.
In order to solve these problems above, we will talk about the practical constructure of Spatially Coupled LDPC codes and the encoding augrithm with low complexity and low time consumption in this paper. Based on the traditional Spatially Coupled LDPC codes, we propose a modified structure of Spatially Coupled LDPC code with arbitrary rates, which allows recursive encoding, we also modify the tail structure of the terminated Spatially Coupled LDPC codes, which makes the termination more effecient. The corresponding encoding augrithm with low complexity will also be provided for these two modified structure. The previous structure can solve the problem of recursive encoding for Spatially Coupled LDPC codes with arbitrary rate, and the later structure can terminate the Spatially Coupled LDPC codes with finite length eflectivly. We also provide the performance analysis of Spatially Coupled LDPC codes with the two modified structure in terms of the design rate and density evolution. It can be observed that both of the modified structures lead to a better belief-propagetion threshold. Besides, some finite-length simulation results of the corresponding Spatially Coupled LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC) are provided to verify the theoretical analysis.
In summary, our study implements the recursive encoding of the Spatial Coupling LDPC codes with arbitrary rates with low complexity and terminates the Spatial Coupled LDPC codes effciently, which reduces the calculate consumption of the encoding of the Spatial Coupled LDPC codes and drives the practical application of Spatial Coupled LDPC codes in 5G communication systems.
KEY WORDS:5G;SC-LDPC;Practicality;Recursive Encoding;Termination


