摘要
无线通信技术的快速发展使人们对频谱资源的需求大大增加，而 现今的频谱分配政策又造成大部分可用频段的利用率较低。认知无线 电技术能感知周围频谱环境，并机会性地接入空闲频段，从而有效解 决频谱资源紧缺与频谱资源利用率低之间的矛盾。
认知无线电的关键技术是频谱感知和动态频谱接入。目前，人们 对频谱感知技术已经进行了大量的研究，但适用于先验信息全盲条件 下的能量检测方法在低信噪比环境下性能较差。仅基于即时感知结果 的动态频谱接入算法可能造成信道频繁切换甚至干扰主用户等情况。 针对以上问题，本论文提出了一种适用于低信噪比环境的改进能量检 测算法，并利用数据预测技术对信道内干扰水平进行预测，以辅助进 行动态频谱接入，降低跳变率。
本论文的主要工作和创新包括：
1.研究了先验信息全盲条件下的能量检测和噪声功率估计联合 迭代算法。噪声功率是能量检测过程中的重要参量，而在系统先验信 息全盲时无法直接获取噪声功率值，一种可行的方法是将噪声功率估 计过程和能量检测过程相结合并迭代至收敛。通过分析三种不同的能 量检测方法分别与噪声功率估计进行联合迭代时的性能，指出了算法 的有效性和在低信噪比环境下的局限性。
2.提出了一种基于功率谱线间相关性的改进能量检测算法。在功 率谱密度中，连续多个信号频点的幅值之间具有相关性，而噪声频点 之间不具有这种相关性，基于此种差异，再结合噪声功率估计技术， 可以有效地从噪声中检测出低信噪比信号。改进算法在保持虚警率的 同时能大大提高检测率，并且具有较低的复杂度。
3.设计了 一种针对频谱感知数据的预测模型。首先通过分析频谱 感知数据的特点和认知无线电对预测的需求选择时间序列预测方法 (ARIMA),然后通过对综合了地理模型、传播模型和用户业务模型而 产生的信源数据进行预测，验证了 ARIMA模型对频谱数据预测的适 用性，并且提出了一种在线预测方式，有效提高预测精度，对结合即 时频谱感知结果和频谱预测数据的动态频谱接入模型进行了研究。
关键词:认知无线电;能量检测;低信噪比;时间序列预测
Key Technologies Research of Cognitive Wireless Communication System
ABSTRACT
The rapid development of wireless communication technology increases the demand for spectrum resources. But current spectrum allocation policy leads to low utilization of available frequency bands. Cognitive radio technology can perceive peripheral spectrum environment and access idle frequency bands opportunistically to resolve the contradiction of scarcity but low utilization of spectrum resources efficiently.
Spectrum sensing and dynamic spectrum access are the key technologies of cognitive radio. Currently, a lot of researches have been studied on spectrum sensing technology. But energy detection as a totally-blind spectrum sensing method has poor performance under low-SNR environment. Dynamic spectrum access algorithm only based on real-time sensing results may leads to frequent channel switching. To solve the above problems, an improved energy detection method applicable to low-SNR environment is proposed in this thesis. It also predicts the interference of channels using time series prediction algorithm for the assistance of dynamic spectrum access to lower the transition rate.
The main work and innovations of this thesis include:
1.Study a totally-blind spectrum sensing method called joint iterative algorithm of noise power estimation and energy detection. Noise power is an important parameter in the process of energy detection, but it can't be obtained directly with the prior information unknown. A feasible method is to combine the iterative process of noise power estimation and energy detection. The performance of joint iterative algorithm of noise power estimation and three different energy detection methods indicate their effectiveness but limitation under low-SNR environment.
2.Propose an improved energy detection algorithm based on the relevance of power density spectrum lines. There is relevance between the amplitudes of signal frequency points in the power density spectrum, which is different with the noise frequency points. This difference can be used to detect low-SNR signal when combined with noise power estimation. This algorithm can improve the detection performance greatly with false alarm rate not increased and it also has low complexity.
3.Design a prediction model for spectnim sensing data. Choose time series prediction method (ARIMA) by analyzing the features of spectrum sensing data and the prediction demand in cognitive radio. The prediction of source data produced by integrating geography model > propagation model and user traffic model indicates that ARIMA model is applicable for spectrum sensing data. Then propose an online prediction mode to improve accuracy and study on the dynamic spectrum access model based on both real-time sensing results and spectrum prediction results.
KEY WORDS:cognitive radio;energy detection;low-SNR;time-series prediction

