摘要
随着无线通信技术的迅猛发展，频谱资源面临严重短缺的问题， 研究高频造效率的通信技术尤为必要。同时同频全双工通信允许通信 双方同时在相同的频段上传输数据，理论上频谱效率和数据传输速率 是现行时分双工和频分双工的两倍。高效的自干扰信号消除技术是实 现全双工通信的基础，而相位噪声是制约自干扰消除性能的瓶颈因素。 因此研究高效解决相位噪声的自干扰消除算法非常必要。
论文选题来源于国家自然科学基金项目“基于认知与极化信号处 理的功放节能研究”(项目编号：61271177)和“基于相位噪声加性高斯 化的全双工极化自干扰消除研究”(项目编号：61501050)。针对相位噪 声是制约全双工自干扰消除瓶颈这一问题，本论文以极化信号处理技 术为基础，利用信号极化状态对相位噪声不敏感这一特性，分别在单 载波全双工通信和OFDM全双工通信中中提出了两种自干扰消除法， 解决了相位噪声对自干扰消除的影响，提升了自干扰消除量。本文主 要研究内容如下：
(1)论文总结和分析了全双工通信的研究现状，包括其研究背景、 研究内容、主要应用以及目前面临的主要挑战。指出相位噪声是制约 全双工通信自干扰信号消除的瓶颈因素。同时梳理了极化信号处理技 术中的相关理论和技术，指出极化信号处理技术在无线通信领域特别 是全双工自干扰消除中的应用潜力。
(2)针对相位噪声是制约自干扰消除性能的瓶颈这一问题，本文提 出了对抗相位噪声的单载波极化自干扰消除算法。本算法综合考虑相 位噪声对自干扰信号和期望信号的影响，采用基于极化信号处理的两 步酉矩阵旋转消除法。第一步消除相位噪声对自干扰信号的影响，利 用自干扰抵消信号消除自'干扰；第二步消除相位噪声对期望信号的影 响。理论分析和仿真分析表明，本文提出的自干扰消除算法性能比现 有时频域对抗相位噪声的自干扰消除算法性能有5-10dB的提升。
（3）针对相位噪声是制约OFDM全双工通信系统中自干扰消除的 瓶颈这一问题，本文提出了对抗相位噪声的OFDM极化全双工自干扰 消除算法。本算法采用基于疲化信号处理的自干扰算法消除了相位噪 声引入的 CPE （common phase error,公共相位旋转）和 ICI （inter-carrier interference,子载波间干扰）。理论分析和仿真验证了本算法比现有的 对抗相位噪声的OFDM自干扰消除算法有3-7dB的性能提升。
本论文在全双工通信自干扰消除技术研究中，釆用基于极化信息 处理的自干扰消除技术，解决了相位噪声对自干扰消除的对抗作用， 为自干扰消除技术的研究提供了新思路。
关键词:全双工通信;自干扰消除;相位噪声;极化信息处理
RESEARCH OF HOW TO RESIST PHASE NOISE FOR SELF-INTERFERENCE CANCELATION IN POLARIZATION FOR FULL DUPLEX
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of wireless communication technology, the shortage of current wireless spectrum resources is becoming a severe problem, it is necessary to develop the communication technologies with high frequency spectrum utilization. Full duplex communication allows a node to transmit and receive signal simultaneously at the same frequency band. In theory, the rate of spectrum utilization and data transmission are two times than he time division duplex and frequency division duplex. The key to realize the full communication is to cancel the self-interference, and the phase noise is proved to be the bottleneck of the self-interference cancelation. So how to suppress the phase noise effectivelyis essential:
The task of this paper is from the national major projects for science: ''Research on power amplifier energy efficience based on cognitive and polarization signal processing (61271177)" and ''Research on polarimetric self-interference cancellation in full-duplex system based on additive Gaussianized phase noise (61501050)". Aiming at this problem, a novel method in polarization domain to cancel the effect of phase noise on the self-interference cancelation and recover the desired signal is proposed in this paper. This method can be achieved by converting the multiplicative noise to additive noise with polarization signal processing in two steps. The mian work of this paper is following three aspects:
(l)This paper analyzes and summarizes the current research status of the full duplex, witch include the research content, primary uses and the mian challenge. It pointed that the phase noise is the bottleneck to cancel the self-interference. In addition, this paper gives a brief introduction of the polarization signal processing technologies, which has a tremendous in
potential in the wireless communication, especially for the self-interference cancelation in the full duplex communication.
(2)Aim at the problem that the phase noise is the bottleneck of the self^interference cancelation. A novel method for suppressing the phase noise of the self-interference cancellation is proposed in this paper. The method considers the effect of phase noise both on the sei仁interference and the desired signal. This method can be achieved by converting the multiplicative noise to additive noise with polarization signal processing in two steps. The first step is converting the effect of phase noise on the self-interference to the desired signal and the white noise using stokes vector processing in polarization domain, then using the reconstructed signal to cancel the self-interference signal. The second step is recovering the desired signal using the same principle. Theory analysis and numerical simulation show that the phase noise caused by the local oscillator of the transmitter and receiver is canceled, the amount - of cancelation is improved by 5-10dB than the traditional cancelation method.
(3)Aim at the problem that the phase nosie is the bottleneck of the self-interference cancelation of the OFDM full duplex communication. A novel algorithm for suppressing the phase noise of the self-interference cancellation of the OFDM full duplex is proposed in this paper. The method cancels the CPE (common phase error) and ICI (inter-carrier interference) both of the self^interference and the desired signal. This method can be also achieved by two steps. The first step is canceling the CPE and ICI of the self-interference, the second step is canceling the CPE and ICI of the desired signal. Theory analysis and numerical simulation show that the phase noise caused by the local oscillator of the transmitter and receiver is canceled, the amount of cancelation is improved by 3-7dB than the traditional cancelation method.
This paper proposed two algorithms to suppress the effect of phase nosie for self-interference based on the polarization signal processing, which provide a new way to cancel the self-interference in the full duplex communication system.

KEY WORDS:Full duplex communication;Self-interference cancelation;Phase noise;Polarizaiton signal processing


