摘要
互联网在最近十多年经历了一个飞速发展的时期，并成为超越报纸、 广播和电视三大传统媒体的新媒体，进入信息爆炸时代。热点事件是网 络信息的代表，其传播过程不仅影响现实社会中人们的看法和观点，还 影响了整个社会的舆论导向。而社交网络使得热点事件的传播不再受时 间和空间的限制，这大大加快了事件在全社会的扩散。因此，分析热点 事件的传播规律，及时地抑制负面的言论，并促进正能量热点事件的传 播，是分析决策者非常关注的问题。
本文从时间序列的角度分析热点事件的传播规律。时序分析方法假 设，虽然网络中每个个体的特征和属性不同，但是所有个体的集体行为 会抵消不同个体之间的差异，从而造成整体的趋势，表现在时间序列的 波形变化。同-类型的热点事件的趋势是一致的，服从相同的传播规律。 本文首先采集了 300个新浪微博的热点事件时间序列数据集，利用K-SC (K-Spectral Centroid)时间序列聚类算法对热点事件聚类，运用缩放和 平移方法对事件序列归-化，根据不同热点事件时序波形之间的相似度 来区分不同的类别，得到3个典型的热点事件传播模式。其中每个类别 都具有两个传播阶段的特性，不同点在于两个传播阶段中峰值的比例以 及到达峰值的时间点，这种规律有助于分析热点事件的形成过程，研究 不同的热点事件类型各自的传播规律。
本文提出了新的热点事件传播模型SpikeM-G(SpikeM-Gaussian), 此模型可以更好地拟合热点事件在社交网络的传播过程。在SpikeM-G 模型中，既考虑了代表意见领袖传播过程的第一阶段，又考虑了代表普 通受众传播过程的第一阶段，同时也考虑了社交网络节点幕率分布的特 性。仿真结果表明，SpikeM-G能更好地拟合热点事件的时间序列，更 好地反映热点事件传播规律的数学特性。而拟合后的模型参数表明，传 播过程的第-阶段持续时间较短，变化较快，具有高挥发性的特点，而 第二阶段持续的时间较长，变化平缓，说明第一阶段只是社交网络中关 键节点的传播，而第二阶段才会覆盖的整个网络。
关键词:社交网络;微博;热点事件;时间序列;聚类
TIME SERIES ANALYSIS ON SOCIAL NETWORK
ABSTRACT
In the past decades, Internet has experienced a period of rapid development, and become a new media beyond three traditional media of newspaper, radio and television. Hot events are the representative of the network information. They not only affect people's attitudes and opinions in realistic society, but also affect the direction of public opinion. The information propagation process is no longer restricted by time and space by means of social network, which significantly accelerates the speed of spreading. Therefore, analyzing the propagation process of hot events, and controlling the negative rhetoric is very concerned.
This thesis focus on the perspective of time series to analysis propagation rules of hot events. Even though the characteristics and attributes of each individual in social network is dififerent, the collective behavior of all individuals would offset of the differences, resulting in the overall trend, which turns to the waveform changes in time series. Firstly 300 hot events are crawled from Sina-Weibo, then they are clustered to three centroids by applying the K-Spectral Centroid(K-SC) clustering algorithm, and find that the diffusion process is divided into two step as the temporal patterns are consist of two spikes. The differences between two stages are the proportion of the two spike and the peak point in time.
For the purpose of fitting the centroids, a new model named SpikeM-G is introduced base on SpikeM. In SpikeM-G model, both the first stage caused by opinion lead and the second stage on behalf of the general audience in the process of the propagation are considered, the characteristic of power law distribution is modeled as well. The simulation results demonstrate that the new model describes all the rise and fall patterns with hi
high accuracy, while SpikeM is only capable of fitting the first spike. The fitted model parameters show that the first stage has a shorter duration, while the second stage has a longer lasting time. It illustrates that the information is spread among key nodes of the social network, and then it will cover the entire network in the second stage.
KEY WORDS:social network;microblog;hot events;time series;clustering


