摘要
为实现第五代(The 5th Generation, 5G)移动通信系统1000倍移 动数据速率提升，5G的技术研发主要从网络异构密集化、频谱效率 (Spectral efficiency, SE)提升和频谱资源开发等方面进行。作为移动数据 速率提升的主要力量，异构无线网络(Heterogeneous networks, HetNets) 能显著提升网络覆盖与网络容量，但HetNets的引入同时带来了复杂的 异构网络间协调和干扰管理问题。协同多点传输(Coordinated multi-point transmission, CoMP)技术作为 LTE-A (Long Term Evolution-Advanced) 系统的关键技术，预期能实现异构网络间协调，降低网络间干扰，进一 步提高HetNets网络性能。另一方面，提供高保障性的无线传输安全是 HetNets＞乃至5G的重要研究方向之一，采用异构协作的物理层安全技 术从信息论安全角度被证明可实现无线信号在HetNets中的安全传输。 本论文围绕HetNets结合CoMP的网络覆盖与容量研究，包括安全覆盖 和安全容量研究，建立异构协作模型，从理论上分析和优化HetNets中 考虑异构协作的网络覆盖概率、安全覆盖概率、平均传输数据率以及安 全速率等。具体研究成果归纳如下：
(1)针对非均匀HetNets结合CoMP的SE分析与优化，在基站接入 容量受限和不可信小小区基站(Smallcell base station, SBS)存在的场景 下，提出了基于基站负载和安全可信状态联合感知的异构多点协作方案; 分别釆用齐次泊松点过程和高斯-泊松点过程建模宏蜂窝基站(Macrocell base station, MBS)和SBS (包括合法SBS和不可信SBS)的位置分布; 在考虑MBS与SBS之间存在距离限制的情况下，分析了典型移动用户 (Mobileuser, MU)的平均SE和HetNets网络的单位面积频谱效率(Area SE, ASE)；进一步证明了最优基站部署密度的唯一存在性，并给出了最 优基站密度的表达式。最后，仿真结果验证了理论分析的正确性以及所提异构协作方案的有效性，并分析了系统参数对所提异构协作方案的影 响。
(2)针对支持缓存与能量收集技术的HetNets结合CoMP的网络覆 盖与容量分析，提出了 MBS与异构SBS联合服务MU的协调与协作方 案，其中异构SBS的协调基于基站能量状态、基站缓存与MU请求匹配、 信道资源以及相应链路接收信号强度(Received signal strength, RSS)等 信息；基于随机几何与概率论，分析基站的小区负载分布，刻画典型MU 的累积RSS统计特性，并得到了典型MU的平均数据传输速率；釆用 Gamma分布拟合RSS的概率密度分布，得到了典型MU的覆盖概率。仿 真结果证明了理论分析的正确性，并分析了协作RSS门限、缓存容量及 能量收集速率、最大信道复用数等系统参数对网络覆盖与传输速率的影 响。
(3)针对考虑差异化基站高度的HetNets结合CoMP的SE与业务卸 载分析，提岀了一种MBS保障基本网络覆盖、异构SBS联合传输与业 务卸载的方案，其中异构SBS的协作策略取决于基站缓存与MU请求匹 配，基站高度以及基站负载等信息;本文分析得到了 MU从MBS卸载 到协作SBS簇的卸载概率；釆用分段函数并依独立概率建模无线信号传 播的非视距传播链路和视距传播链路，并用修正的COST (Cooperation europeenne dans le domaine de la recherche Scientifique et Technique) 231 路 径损耗模型建模基站高度对路径损耗参数的影响，推导了典型MU的平 均SE表达式。仿真结果验证了理论分析的正确性，并分析了所提方案及 系统参数对HetNets的SE及业务卸载方案的影响。
(4)针对HetNets结合CoMP的安全覆盖与安全容量分析与优化，首 先在两层HetNets场景下提出了一种基于动态节点选择的安全基站选择 机制，基于随机几何，推导了典型MU的安全中断概率，以衡量HetNets 所能提供的安全覆盖性能；然后，为进一步提高系统安全传输速率，提 出了基于多节点(自私节点)协作干扰的安全机制，并结合基站的人工 噪声以降低非合法链路的无线信道质量;采用Stackberg博弈模型建立基站所需的干扰发送功率与干扰节点的干扰要价之间的策略博弈，基于最 优化理论证明了 Stackberg均衡点（包括发送节点的功率分配、干扰节点 的发送功率以及要价）的存在性和唯一性，并得到了均衡点的闭式解; 数值仿真表明所提协作方案能在降低基站侧人工噪声的分配功率的同时, 提高系统的安全传输速率，这为HetNets能效提升和无线传输安全提供 了理论指导。
综上，将CoMP技术引入HetNets,本文提出四种以MU为中心的、 同时考虑网络状态的异构协作方案以及一种提高安全传输速率的协作干 扰方案，并以网络覆盖概率、SE、ASE、数据传输速率、安全中断概率、 安全传输速率等为性能参数，理论地分析所提异构协作方案对HetNets 网络覆盖与容量性能的影响，为实际异构协作无线网络的部署与实现提 供理论指导。
关键词:异构无线网络;协同多点传输技术;物理层安全;随机几何;博弈论
ON THE STUDY OF COVERAGE AND CAPACITY OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS WITH COMP
ABSTRACT
The fifth generation (5G) mobile networks are expected to accommodate the lOOOx improvement of mobile data rate through three main technical aspects: network densification, spectral efficiency (SE) enhancement, and spectrum extension. As a dominant theme, network densification is to densely deploy diverse smallcell base stations (SBSs) coexisting with conventional macrocell base stations (MBSs), given rise to the heterogeneous networks (HetNets). However, the HetNet architecture introduces complex coordination and interference managements. Coordinated multi-point (CoMP) transmission is expected to coordinate heterogeneous BSs and mitigate co-tier and cross-tier interference in HetNets. Providing secure wireless transmission is one of the top priorities of 5G and HetNets. Physical layer security with CoMP is proven to be capable of providing secure transmission from the view of information-theoretic security. In this thesis, we study the coverage and capacity performance, including the secure coverage and secrecy capacity, of HetNets with CoMP. Based on stochastic geometry and game theory frameworks, several tractable models for analyzing the proposed CoMP strategies are presented to evaluate the coverage and capacity improvement in HetNets in terms of coverage probability, SE, area SE (ASE), average data rate, secrecy outage probability and secrecy rate. Detailed contributions are summarized as follows.
(1) To analyze and optimize the SE of nonunifbrm HetNets with CoMP, we propose a novel capacity- and trust-aware BS cooperation strategy, considering the limited BS capacity and the existence of untrusted SBSs in practical scenarios. By modeling the distribution of MBSs and all (normal and untrusted) SBSs as independent homogeneous Poisson Point Process (HPPP) and Gauss-Poisson process (GPP), and with repulsive distance among MBSs and
SBSs, expressions for SE and ASE are analytically derived with the characterization of the statistics of aggregate signal strength (ASS) and interference strength (AIS). In addition, the optimal density of normal SBSs in maximizing the SE and ASE is proved to exist and analytically obtained. Finally, simulation results are provided to validate the theoretical analysis and effectiveness of the proposed CoMP strategies.
(2)To analyze the coverage probability and capacity of cache-enabled and energy harvesting-powered HetNets with CoMP, we propose a novel BS coordination strategy among MBSs and SBSs based on the knowledge of the energy states and the cached contents of SBSs, along with the awareness of the availability of channel resources and the average received signal strength (RSS) of the corresponding link. MBSs and the SBSs are coordinated to provide high data rate and further improve the network coverage. Stochastic geometry is applied to characterize the statistics of the cell load of MBSs and SBSs, as well as the ASS and AIS. Average MU capacity fbr the BS coordination strategy is obtained. The coverage probability is also derived with Gamma approximation fbr the distribution of ASS and AIS. Analytical results reveal that the average MU capacity and coverage probability can be maximized with optimal cache size, energy harvesting rate and cooperative RSS threshold. Finally, extensive numerical and simulation results are provided.
(3)To analyze the SE and traffic offloading of HetNets with CoMP, considering the impact of heterogeneous BS heights, we propose a MU-centric cooperative SBS clustering strategy based on the information of the cached contents, the transmission distance (between the elevated BSs and MUs) and the cell load of SBSs. The MUs failed to be offloaded to the cooperative SBS clusters are associated with the nearest MBSs. Incorporating nonline-of-sight (NLoS) and line-of-sight (LoS), and leveraging modified COST 231 model to evaluate the impact of BS height on the path loss parameters, explicit expressions fbr the average SE and offloading probability are derived. Extensive simulations are conducted to validate the theoretical analysis and demonstrate the
impact of the network parameters.
(4)Finally, to analyze and optimize the secure coverage and secrecy rate ofHetNets with CoMP, we first propose a dynamic point selection (DPS)-based secure BS association scheme in a two-tier HetNet. With stochastic geometry framework, closed-form expression for the secrecy outage probability (SOP) is derived. To further enhance the secrecy rate, we propose a CoMP-based cooperative jamming strategy, where multi-antenna BS transmits information signals along with artificial noise (AN) to disturb the eavesdropper, and multiple jammers are coordinated to assist the legitimate link for better secure transmission with some payoffs. A single-leader multi-follower Stackelberg game between the BS and the assisting jammers is formulated to maximize the achievable secrecy rate at BS and payoffs at jammers. Stackelberg equilibriums, including optimal fraction of transmit power for AN, optimal transmit power and asking prices of assisting jammers, are proved to exist and analytically derived. Numerical results validate the derived results and reveal that the proposed cooperative jamming strategy can significantly improve the secrecy performance and meanwhile save more energy for information signals, which is meaningful for future wireless communication.	*
Overall, leveraging CoMP in HetNets, we propose several MU-centric BS coordination and cooperative strategies with the consideration ofheterogeneous network status. To evaluate the performance of the proposed strategies, we theoretical analyze the coverage probability, SE, ASE, average MU capacity, and SOP with stochastic geometry. Moreover, the achievable secrecy rate has been maximized with game theory. The study and analysis in this thesis can provide theoretical insights for the deployment and implementation of CoMP in HetNets.
KEY WORDS:HetNets;CoMP;physical layer security;stochastic geometry;game theory
