摘要
大规模天线系统被认为是下一代5G通信的关键技术之一。在接收 端配置有大规模天线阵列，大规模天线系统可以实现非常高的频谱和能 量效率。大规模系统面临的一个挑战是对信道状态信息(Channel State Information, CSD的估计和导频污染的问题，随着天线数目的大量增加, 信道信息估计复杂度非常高而变得不可以接受。所以我们需要考虑低 复杂度和低开销的大规模天线系统。一些非相干的传输方法可以考虑, 典型的的非相干检测器是差分检测(Differential Detection, DD),每个 用户在发射端采用差分编码，接收端采用自相关接收机(Autocorrelation Receiver, AcR)进行差分检测，在缺少精确信道信息的条件下也能检测 出信号。然而由于缺少信道信息，非相干检测的性能受到一定的制约, 怎样设计合理高效的算法提高非相干检测性能是本论文研究的重点。
在此情况下，论文研究大规模天线系统下的属于低复杂度范围内的 非相干检测问题。论文的研究内容和创新点如下：
1.大规模天线系统下的多符号差分检测(Multiple Symbol Differential Detection, MSDD)。MSDD 一次检测多个符号，在许多实际的情景下, 它可以渐进的达到相干检测的性能。本文将传统的基于单天线的MSDD 扩展至接收端有大规模天线阵列的场景。
2	..大规模天线系统下的软入软出(Soft-input Sofi-output ,SISO) MSDD。 为了降低通信过程中信道的衰落、噪声和干扰的影响，进一步提高非相 干系统的性能，我们可以结合信道编码。性能良好的信道编码，例如低 密度奇偶校验码(Low Density Parity Check Code, LDPC)和 Turbo 码的迭 代译码算法，依赖于检测器的软输出。大规模天线系统中现存的MSDD 硬判决输出不适宜迭代译码，所以我们需要进一步研究在大规模天线系 统下MSDD的软输出判决子，为进一步地与信道编码结合做准备。
I
3	.大规模天线系统下的非相干联合多符号差分检测与信道译码。 将信道编码的因子图与SISO MSDD的因子图进行融合，提出的SISO MSDD可以很容易与性能良好的信道编码结合。该联合检测与译码模型, 可以使符号的软信息在SISO MSDD和与SISO信道译码器中迭代，使得 更为精确的符号先验信息进入检测器，同时使得进入译码的符号的后验 信息也更为精确，译码性能进一步地提高。
4	.大规模系统下的非相干多用户传输方法。首先，在已知用户能量 空间分布(Power Space Profile, PSP)的情况下，提出一个简单的用户调 度策略，在这个策略下，可以减少不同用户在线性天线阵列上PSP的重 叠。提出的用户调度策略只利用非常少的信道信息，几乎是盲的。接下 来，接收端的信号经过一个低复杂度的多用户分离器后送入非相干的顺 序干扰消除器，接下来送入一个联合检测与译码器。相对于传统的相干 的大规模天线系统，提出的算法能够有效地克服信道估计的高复杂度问 题而取得较好的性能。
关键词：大规模天线系统低复杂度软入软出多符号差分检测 置信度传播用户调度
LOW COMPLEXITY TRANSMISSION SCHEME FOR MASSIVE MIMO SYSTEMS
ABSTRACT
Massive MIMO (M-MIMO) system is considered one of the key technologies of next-generation 5G communication. Equipped with the massive antenna arrays, M-MIMO system can achieve very high efficiency both in spectral and energy. One of the challenges of coherent M-MIMO is the acquisition of channel state information (CSI) and pilot contamination. As the number of antennas at the base station grows large, the system overhead and the complexity associated with channel estimation will become too high to afford. When considering low-complexity and low-overhead M-MIMO system, some n<mcohererjt transmission schemes may be more favorable.One of the typical noncoherent detectors is the differential detection (DD), each user uses differential PSK modulation and the receiver employs differential detection without explicit channel estimation.However, due to the lack of channel information, the performance of non-coherent detection by a certain constraints, how to design a reasonable and efficient algorithm to improve noncoherent detection performance is the focus of this paper.
Based on this situation, the thesis studies the noncoherent detection problem in the range of low complexity in M-MIMO systems. The content and innovation of the thesis are as follows.
l.The multiple symbol differential detection (MSDD) in massive MIMO systems. MSDD jointly detects multiple consecutive symbols, and it has been shown to achieve comparable performance of the coherent counterpart in many interesting scenarios. We extend traditional MSDD with single receive antenna to massive antenna array.
2	.Soft-input soft-output (SISO) MSDD in M-MIMO. In order to reduce the influence of channel fading a noise and interference, and further improve
III
the system performance, we incorporate the channel codes. The decoding of powerful channel codes, such as LDPC and Turbo code, relies on soft-outputs of detector to realize iterative algorithm within channel decoding. Regarding the M-MIMO system, the existing hard-output decision metric is not suitable fbr powerful SISO channel decoding. To this end, a soft-output decision metric and a corresponding SISO framework is needed to further improve the performance of the noncoherent system.
3	.A noncoherent joint MSDD and channel decoding framework is proposed for M-MIMO system. Combine the factor graphs of SISO MSDD and channel code, the proposed SISO MSDD can be easily integrated with advanced channel codes. The framework enables more accurate priori information of data symbols is sent into MSDD and more accurate posteriori information of data symbols is sent into decoder, at the cost of extra iterations between SISO MSDD and SISO channel decoder.
4	.A noncoherent multiuser transmission scheme is proposed fbr M-MIMO systems without explicit channel estimation. First, a simple user scheduling algorithm is proposed by employing the knowledge of power space profile (PSP). We note the impact of PSP on the low-complexity MU-MSDD detector for M-MIMO, and we propose a pattern-fixed random user selection (PF-RUS) scheme to optimize the distributions of power space profile (PSP) of individual users, which alleviates the overlap of PSPs. PF-RUS is almost blind but effectively shapes the users' PSP to meet the favor of the proposed detector with PSP matching and SIC. Then, each output stream of the low complexity multi-user separator is fed into a noncoherent successive interference cancellation (N-SIC) processor, and finally into the joint MSDD and channel decoder. The proposed scheme with high performance bears the potential to solve the high channel estimation overhead fbr conventional coherent M-MIMO systems.
KEY WORDS: Massive MIMO low complexity SISO MSDD BP User scheduling
IV
