摘要
为了积极推进绿色通信，实现节能减排降低功放能耗，研究优化 功放能效的通信技术尤为必要。极化调制技术利用信号的极化状态承 载信息，利用极化状态不受功放非线性影响这一属性可以有效提升功 放能效。然而无线信道中的去极化效应交叉极化鉴别度(Cross Polarization Discrimination, XPD)会造成极化调制信号分量之间的交 叉功率泄漏，进而降低极化调制性能。因此研究高效对抗XPD的补 偿算法非常必要。
针对去极化效应XPD会降低极化调制性能，进而影响功放能效 这一问题，本论文提出了 XPD补偿算法来对抗XPD造成的极化调制 信号分量间的交叉功率泄漏。根据信道状态信息估计是否理想，分为 两个研究点：基于理想信道估计的XPD补偿算法和基于信道估计误 差的XPD补偿算法。本论文的具体研究内容如下：
(1)论文总结和分析了极化调制的研究现状，包括其研究背景、 研究内容、主要应用以及目前面临的主要挑战，并指出影响极化调制 性能的关键因素之一是无线双极化信道中的去极化效应。同时梳理了 去极化效应的相关理论和消除算法，指出研究对抗去极化效应XPD 的补偿算法来提升极化调制性能尤为必要。
(2)针对无线信道中的去极化效应XPD对极化调制信号造成的 影响，本课题在信道状态信息估计理想的条件下提出了一种极化调制 信号的XPD补偿算法。第一步建立极化调制中对抗XPD效应的系统 模型，分析XPD效应对极化调制的影响；第二步对信道状态信息进 行估计，在信道估计理想情况下，利用估计得到的信道状态信息计算 得到补偿因子，在接收端对信号进行处理，即对每一时刻接收信号的 极化状态乘以补偿因子，从而对抗去极化效应XPD带来的两路信号 分量之间的交叉功率泄漏，提升极化调制的误码率性能。理论分析和 仿真分析表明该补偿算法对比未补偿之前的性能有2.5dB的提升。
(3)考虑到XPD效应对极化调制造成的影响，需要对信道状态
I
信息进行估计并补偿XPD的影响。然而实际中信道估计算法会引入 估计误差，因此本课题研究了信道估计误差对XPD补偿算法性能的 影响。首先建立了信道估计误差影响下受XPD影响的极化调制系统 模型，并通过分析信道估计误差对接收信噪比的影响，计算得到存在 估计误差时极化调制误码率的闭式解以此来评估信道估计误差对 XPD补偿算法性能的影响。研究结果表明信道估计误差的大小会在 不同程度上降低补偿算法的性能，这一结论对于选取高精度的信道估 计方法来提升系统性能具有指导性的意义。
为了有效对抗去极化效应XPD对极化调制信号造成的交叉功率 泄漏，本论文研究了极化调制信号的XPD补偿算法。根据信道状态 信息估计是否理想分别提出了基于理想信道估计的XPD补偿算法和 基于信道估计误差的XPD补偿算法，研究表明该补偿算法可以有效 提升极化调制的性能，并为去极化效应XPD影响下的极化调制性能 研究提供了新思路;
关键词：极化调制去极化效应XPD补偿算法误码率
RESEARCH OF A CROSS-POLARIZATION DISCRIMINATION COMPENSATION ALGORITHM FOR POLARIZATION MODULATION SIGNAL
ABSTRACT
In order to promote green communication and realize energy conservation and emissions reduction, research on optimization of the power amplifier efficiency communication technology is necessary. Polarization modulation technology utilizes the signal state information and the property that polarization state is not affected by nonlinear power amplifier to improve the power amplifier efficiency effectively. However, the depolarization effect XPD in the wireless channel can cause cross leakage of the power of the polarization modulation signal component thus reduces the polarization modulation performance. Therefore, the effective compensation algorithm against XPD is very necessary.
In view of the depolarization effect XPD can reduce polarization modulation performance, and thus affect the power amplifier efficiency, an XPD compensation algorithm against the polarization cross power leakage between the modulation signal components caused by XPD is proposed in this paper. According to whether the channel state information estimation is ideal, the XPD compensation algorithm is studied from two cases where the channel estimation is ideal and the channel estimation error exists. The main work of this paper is following three aspects:
(1)	This paper analyzes and summarizes the current research status of the polarization modulation, including the research content, primary uses and the main challenges. It pointed that the depolarization effect is the key factor that influences the properties of polarization modulation. In addition, this paper gives a brief introduction of the relevant theory and elimination algorithm of the depolarization effect, and points out that the research on compensation algorithm against the depolarization effect of XPD to improve the polarization modulation performance is necessary.
in
(2)	Aimed at the depolarization effects XPD in the wireless channel on the polarization modulation signal, this paper proposed an XPD compensation algorithm of polarization modulation signal under the conditions of the ideal channel state information estimation. In the first step, the system model confronting XPD polarization modulation effect is established, and the effect of XPD on polarization modulation is analyzed. In the second step, channel state information is estimated. Under the ideal estimation situation, using the channel state information obtained from the estimation the compensation factor is calculated, and the signal is processed in the receiver, polarization state of the received signal times the compensation factor, in order to counter the cross power attenuation between the two signal component brought by the depolarization effect of XPD, to improve BER performance of the polarization modulation. Theoretical analysis and simulation analysis show that the performance of compensation algorithm is 2.5 dB better than that before the compensation.
(3)	Considering the XPD effects on the polarization modulation, it is necessary to estimate the channel state information and compensate the influence of XPD. However, the actual channel estimation algorithm can introduce estimation error, so this paper researches the effects of the channel estimation error on the performance of the XPD compensation algorithm. First, set up the polarization modulation system model under the influence of channel estimation error affected by XPD, and through the analysis of the influences of channel estimation error on the receiving SNR, calculate the closed solution of polarization modulation BER when the estimated error exists, to assess the influence of channel estimation error on the performances of the XPD compensation algorithm. The results show that the size of the channel estimation error will degrade the performance of the compensation algorithm in different degrees, this conclusion has guiding significance on selection for high precision of channel estimation methods to improve the system performance.
In the research of fighting against the depolarization effect XPD in wireless communication, an XPD compensation algorithm against the polarization cross power leakage between the modulation signal components caused by XPD is proposed in this paper, which provides a
iv
new idea of the polarization modulation performance research under the depolarization effect XPD.
KEY WORDS: polarization modulation cross-polarization discrimination compensation algorithm BER
