摘要
当前新兴业务和无线设备数目的激增导致了无线流量特别是室 内流量需求的飞速增长，射频频谱资源紧缺的问题正不断凸显。随着 发光二极管(Light-EmittingDiode, LED)等新型照明技术的推广，基 于 LED 的可见光通信(Visible Light Communication, VLC)技术为满 足室内绿色照明和高速通信需求提供了新的途径。然而，由于室内用 户设备的日益增长，现有点对点的可见光通信已经难以满足未来室内 多用户高速通信的需求。可见光多用户多入多出(Multiple Input Multiple Output, MIMO)系统可以充分利用可见光信号下行广播的特 性，实现多个用户的数据传输。考虑到照明是LED的基本功能，研 究可见光多用户MIMO系统调光技术，对实现兼容照明的多用户高 速通信和推动可见光多用户MIMO系统的实际应用具有重要意义。
传统可见光通信的调光技术利用不同的信号维度(幅度、占空比) 来调节光功率。在可见光多用户MIMO系统中，面临着多用户干扰 (Multi-user Interference, MUI)、用户信道相关性较高以及用户信道 状态不一致的问题。传统调光由于可用来调节光功率的信号维度有 限，面临着牺牲用户较大通信性能的问题。事实上，在可见光多用户 MIMO系统中发送端的多个LED所带来的信道状态信息(Channel State Information, CSI)也是可被利用的重要资源。在传统调光技术的 基础上，论文通过挖掘CSI信息所带来的空间域资源，研究可见光多 用户MIMO系统中的空间调光技术，可以有效实现系统高效照明和 多用户高速通信的兼容。
论文通过空间信息处理，充分挖掘可见光多用户MIMO系统的 CSL研究了空间维度调光的新理论和新方法，有效避免传统调光由 于改变了信号幅度和占空比所带来的通信性能损伤，使得提升用户通 信性能的目标得以实现。具体研究内容如下：
首先，为了解决MUI消除与调光的兼容问题，研究基于用户间 干扰消除的空间调光技术。针对可见光多用户多入单出(Multi-user Multiple Input Single Output, MU-MISO)系统分别提出了基于迫零预 编码的空间调光(Zero Forcing Precoding based Spatial Dimming, SD-ZF )和基于最小均方误差预编码的空间调光(Minimum Mean-Squared Error Precoding based Spatial Dimming, SD-MMSE)方 案。SD-ZF和SD-MMSE直接改变工作LED的数目实现光功率调节， 能够有效降低信号的削峰失真。同时通过发送天线选择(Transmit Antenna Selection, TA.S)来改善系统预编码方案的性能。理论分析和 仿真结果表明，SD-ZF和SD-MMSE方案相比于基于ZF预编码的模 拟调光(ZF Precoding based Analogue Dimming, AD-ZF)和基于 MMSE 预编码的模拟调光(MMSE Precoding based Analogue Dimming, AD-MMSE)方案可以有效降低用户削峰噪声，并提升了系统的通信 性能。在70%亮度、BER门限为10-3的条件下，SD-ZF相比于AD-ZF 可以获得4 dB左右的信噪比增益。
其次，针对用户信道相关性限制调光精度的问题，研究基于用户 信道去相关的空间调光技术。在可见光多用户多入多出(Multi-user Multiple Input Multiple Output, MU-MIMO)系统中提出了模拟一空间 协同调光(Joint Analogue Spatial Dimming, JASD)方案。JASD 联合 调节系统的工作LED数目和信号直流偏置，能够在保障系统调光精 度的前提下有效降低发送端的LED数目，从而改善用户信道相关性。 此外，JASD利用CSI采用基于最大化最小奇异值准则的发送天线选 择(Maximized Minimum Singular Value based TAS, TAS-MMSV)算 法来确定工作LED,有效改善用户的信道增益。JASD相比于模拟调 光(Analogue Dimming,AD)方案可以有效降低系统在低亮度条件下 的削峰噪声并提升用户的通信性能。在80%亮度、BER门限为10-3 的条件下，JASD相比于AD可以实现13dB左右的信噪比增益。
最后，针对用户信道状态不一致限制通信容量的问题，研究基于 用户信道状态自适应的空间调光技术。在可见光MU-MIMO系统中 通过用户信道状态自适应的功率分配，提出了功率一模拟一空间协同 调光(Joint Power Analogue Spatial Dimming, JPASD)方案。首先分 析模拟一空间协同调光在不同亮度条件下的信号电功率并与模拟调 光进行比较，说明由于模拟一空间维度的协同能够实现更高的电信号 功率，以此为基础进一步联合功率域提升用户通信性能。接下来，本 文研究在不同亮度下如何自适应用户信道状态的差异，在发送端利用 CSI进行用户功率分配。为了提升用户在不同亮度的通信容量，本文提出了用户信道状态自适应的功率分配算法。理论和仿真结果表明， JPASD相比于功率均匀分配的方案能够有效降低信道状态不一致带 来的通信容量损失。同时相比于功率一模拟协同调光(Joint Power Analogue Dimming, JPAD)方案，JPASD在不同亮度下可以实现更高 的信号电功率，从而显著提升系统的通信容量。在80%亮度、系统容 量门限为40bit/s/Hz的条件下，JPASD相比于JPAD、JASD和AD分 别实现了 3dB、5dB和7dB左右的信噪比增益。
关键词：可见光通信多用户MIMO调光技术 发送天线选择 功 率分配
RESEARCH ON SPATIAL DIMMING TECHNIQUE IN MULTI-USER MIMO VISIBLE LIGHT COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS
ABSTRACT
The current surge in the number of emerging applications and wireless terminals have led to a rapid increase in the demand for wireless data traffic, as a result, the scarcity of ratio frequency (RF) spectrum has become increasingly prominent. Along with the popularization of new lighting technologies such as light-emitting diode (LED), LED-based visible light communication (VLC) technology provides a new method to meet the requirement of indoor green lighting and high-speed communication. Considering the increasing equipment of indoor users, the current point-to-point VLC link has many difficulties to meet the requirements of indoor multi-user high-speed communication in the future. Due to the downlink broadcast nature of visible light signals and the convenience of easy controlled of LED light source, multi-user multiple input multiple output (MIMO) VLC system can be served as a new method to alleviate the wireless traffic demand of indoor users. Lighting is the primary function of LEDs. The study of dimming technology for multi-user MIMO VLC system is of great significance for realizing the high-speed data communication for multi-users compatible with illumination, which can promote the practical application of multi-user MIMO VLC system.
Traditional dimming methods in VLC is operated in different signal dimensions (amplitude, duty cycle) to regulate optical power. In multi-user MIMO VLC system, there exist some problems such as the multi-user interference (MUI), high user channel correlation, and inconsistent user channel state. Due to the limitation of signal dimensions that can be exploited for optical power adjustment, traditional dimming methods may sacrifice great communication performance. In fact, the
channel state information (CSI) among the multiple LEDs at the transmitter side of multi-user MIMO VLC system is also an important resource that can be utilized. Based on the traditional dimming schemes, the dissertation studies the spatial dimming scheme in multi-user MIMO VLC system by make full user of the spatial domain resources introduced by CSI information, which can effectively realize the compatibility of efficient illumination and multi-user high-speed communication.
Through the spatial information processing, the CSI of the multi-user MIMO VLC system can be fully explored, and the new theory and method of spatial dimension dimming are studied, which effectively avoids the communication performance degradation caused by the traditional dimming schemes due to the adjustment of the amplitude or the duty cycle of forward current. The goal of improving user communication performance at different dimming level can be achieved. The specific research contents are as follows:
First, in order to solve the compatibility problem of MUI elimination and dimming, the spatial dimming based on user interference mitigation is studied. Zero forcing precoding based spatial dimming (SD-ZF) and minimum mean-squared error precoding based spatial dimming (SD-MMSE) schemes are proposed for the multi-user multiple input single output (MU-MISO) system. SD-ZF and SD-MMSE schemes directly change the number of working LEDs to adjust the optical power, which can effectively suppress the clipping distortion of the optical signal. Meanwhile, transmit antenna selection is performed to improve the the performance ZF and MMSE precoding. Theoretical analysis and simulation results reveal that, compared with ZF precoding based analogue dimming (AD-ZF) and MMSE precoding based analog dimming (AD-MMSE) schemes, SD-ZF and SD-MMSE schemes are. effectively reduce the clipping noise of each user and improve the system communication performance. For example, to achieve the target BER threshold of 10_3 at the 70% dimming level, SD-ZF can realize a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) gain of about 4 dB compared with AD-ZF.
Secondly, to solve the problem that the user channel correlation limits the dimming accuracy, the spatial dimming based on user channel

decorrelation is studied. Joint analogue spatial dimming (JASD) scheme is proposed in the multi-user multiple input multiple output (MU-MIMO) VLC system. The number of working LEDs and DC bias of forward current are jointly adjusted by JASD, which can effectively reduce the number of LEDs at the transmitter side with high dimming accuracy, and the user channel correlation can be improved accordingly. Moreover, the maximized minimum singular value based TAS (TAS-MMSV) algorithm is applied in JASD with the utilization of CSI fbr the optimal working LED subset, which could improve the channel gain for each user. Compared with the analogue dimming (AD) scheme, JASD can effectively reduce the clipping noise at lower dimming levels and improve the user communication perfbmiance. For example, to achieve the target BER threshold of 10-3 at 80% dimming level, JASD can achieve a SNR gain of about 13 dB against AD scheme.
Finally, to overcome the limitation of the inconsistent user channel state on the communication capacity, the spatial dimming based on user channel state adaptation is studied. A joint power analogue spatial dimming (JPASD) scheme is proposed in the MU-MIMO VLC system through the adaptive power allocation based on the user channel state. Firstly, the electrical signal power of joint analogue space dimming in different dimming level compared with analog dimming is analyzed. And the joint analogue space dimming scheme is shown to realize higher electrical power compared with analogue dimming, which can pave the way for the association of power domain to improve user communication performance. Then, the adaptation the difference of user channel state under different dimming levels, and CSI is utilized to perform user power allocation at the transmitter side. In order to improve the communication capacity of users in different dimming levels, a power allocatior algorithm with user channel state adaptation is proposed. Theoretical an( simulation results show that JPASD can effectively reduce th communication capacity loss caused by channel state inconsistenc compared to the uniform power allocation scheme. Besides, compar with the joint power analogue dimming (JPAD) scheme, JPASD c achieve higher electrical signal power under different dimming levi

therefore the system, communication capacity can be significantly improved. For example, to achieve a target system capacity threshold of 40bit/s/Hz at 80% dimming level, JPASD could achieve SNR gains of 3dB, 5dB, and 7dB, respectively, compared with JPAD, JASD, and AD scheme.
KEY WORDS: Visible light communications; multi-user multiple input multiple output; dimming control; transmit antenna selection; power allocation

