摘要
随着社交媒体的广泛普及和用户规模的急剧扩张，数据呈爆炸式增 长趋势。用户难以从海量数据中提取出有用信息。同时，为了更好地享 受不同类型的服务，用户往往与多个社交媒体交互，产生的数据也呈现 跨域(即跨社交媒体)分布特点并且相互关联。传统的数据挖掘方法主 要针对单域进行设计，由于忽略了其他域的数据，这些方法深受数据稀 疏性困扰。跨域数据挖掘方法通过聚合不同域中的碎片化数据，不仅能 够弥补单域中缺失的信息，还可以更全面地挖掘社交媒体数据的价值。 现有的跨域数据挖掘方法主要基于单一类型的数据或简化跨域信息间的 关联以实现跨域联合挖掘，面对实际应用中跨域数据呈现出的异质性、 匿名化和动态性的特点导致的信息间关联更加复杂的情况，将难以适用。 用户兴趣实际上是用户产生数据的内在驱动。建模用户兴趣有助于社交 媒体应用完整描述跨域信息间的复杂关联，实现跨域数据的全面融合。 因此，在社交媒体中研究基于用户兴趣的跨域数据挖掘新方法，不仅能 够有效应对跨域数据的异质性、匿名化和动态性带来的挑战，而且对于 推动跨域数据挖掘的实际应用具有重要意义。
论文的选题来源于北京市教委共建项目子课题“基于大数据的异构 信息网络的信息传播及演化机理研究”和“基于社交感知和跨媒体计算 的社会公共安全事件分析与预测研究”。围绕实际的跨域应用场景中面临 的由跨域数据异质性、匿名化和动态性带来的影响跨域数据挖掘性能提 升的关键问题，论文研究社交媒体中基于用户兴趣的跨域数据挖掘新方 法，通过建模用户兴趣，挖掘跨域数据间复杂关联，以提升跨域数据挖 掘方法的性能，同时也为跨域数据挖掘研究的实际应用奠定了基础。论 文具体研究工作及成果如下：
(1)针对跨域数据异质性导致跨域信息间关联交错复杂的问题，研
究了异质跨域数据下基于用户兴趣的跨域用户身份识别方法。为了统一 捕捉来自异质特征空间的跨域信息间的关联，提出了一种基于链接异质 网络嵌入的跨域用户身份识别方法。该方法设计了链接异质网络来描述 复杂的跨域信息间关联，并通过在同一兴趣空间中联合捕捉网络内和网 络间的基于内容主题关系和基于社交关系的用户兴趣信息，以实现异质 数据的融合，从而学习到跨域用户兴趣的完整统一表示。同时，设计基 于负采样的联合训练算法来交替训练异质关系，以进一步提升模型的性 能和训练效率。实验结果表明，所提方法的性能与假设不同类型的跨域 信息相互独立的方法相比性能至少提升19%,证明通过充分挖掘不同类 型跨域信息间的关联可以有效提升跨域用户身份识别的准确性。
(2)针对跨域数据匿名化导致跨域信息间关联缺失不足的问题，研 究了匿名跨域数据下基于用户兴趣的跨域推荐方法。由于用户匿名时只 能获得少量行为数据，为了补充缺失的关联信息，提出了一种基于跨域 异质关系嵌入的跨域推荐方法。首先利用双聚类算法挖掘基于类别的域 间链接以补充域间关联。然后通过联合嵌入项目-项目和项目-类别的跨 域异质关系，进一步丰富跨域信息间的关联，最终联合跨域碎片化信息 获得跨域兴趣的完整表示。另外，通过设计基于异质关系的联合训练算 法来高效地优化和训练模型。实验结果表明，在信息缺失50%且用户匿 名的情况下，所提方法的推荐性能相比于传统的针对匿名用户的单域推 荐和跨域推荐方法至少提升11%,证明了通过全面挖掘隐藏的跨域关联, 可以很好地弥补缺失的跨域信息以提升推荐性能。
(3)针对跨域数据动态性导致跨域信息间具有复杂动态关联的问题, 研究了动态跨域数据下基于用户兴趣的跨域推荐方法。首先对于不同域 信息的跨域全局动态变化和单域内局部动态变化存在差异性的问题，提 出了一种基于多层循环神经网络的跨域推荐方法，以联合建模用户兴趣 的跨域全局演化模式和在单域中的局部动态模式，实现了用户兴趣信息 间动态关联的全面捕捉。其次，针对在捕捉跨域信息的动态变化时会损 失掉部分单域行为间链接的问题，设计了一种基于跨域循环-门控神经网
络的跨域推荐方法，从完整建模长期和短期跨域兴趣的角度出发，在捕 捉用户兴趣的跨域全局演化模式和单域局部动态模式的同时，有效重建 断开的单域行为间的链接。实验结果表明，所提的两个方法比其他基于 动态数据的单域推荐和跨域推荐方法的性能至少提升8%,证明通过准 确捕捉跨域信息间的动态关联可以有效提升推荐性能。
关键词：社交媒体用户兴趣跨域数据挖掘跨域推荐跨域用户 身份识别
in
RESEARCH ON CROSS-DOMAIN DATA MINING BASED ON USER INTERESTS FOR SOCIAL MEDIA
ABSTRACT
With the popularity of social media and the increase of the number of users, the amount of data has exploded. It is difficult for users to extract useful information from massive data. Meanwhile, users often interact with multiple social media to better enjoy different types of services, and the generated data are distributed across domains (i.e., social media) and related to each other. The traditional data mining methods are mainly designed for single-domain scenarios. Due to ignoring the data in other domains, these methods suffer from data sparsity. By aggregating fragmented data in different domains, the cross-domain data mining methods not only supplement the missing infbmiation in a single domain, but also more comprehensively mine the value in social media data. Existing cross-domain data mining methods mainly utilize a single type of data or simplify the correlation between cross-domain infonnation to achieve crossdomainjoint mining. These methods will be difficult to apply to the scenarios where cross-domain con'elations are more complex due to the heterogeneity, anonymization and dynamicity of cross-domain data in the actual application. User interests are actually the intrinsic driver of data generation. Modeling user interests can help social media applications fully describe complex correlations between cross-domain information and achieve comprehensive integration of cross-domain data. Therefore, the study of new cross-domain data mining methods based on user interests in social media can not only effectively solve the challenges brought about by the heterogeneity, anonymization, and dynamicity of cross-domain data, but also play an important role in promoting practical applications of cross-domain data mining.
The thesis is supported by the sub-topics of Beijing Municipal Education Commission Co-construction Project, i.e, uResearch on information dissemi-
v
nation and evolution mechanism of heterogeneous information network based on big data" and "Research on social-sensed cross-media data analysis and mining v . Focusing on the key issues that affect the perfonnance improvement of cross-domain data mining methods caused by cross-domain data heterogeneity, anonymization and dynamicity in actual cross-domain application scenarios, the thesis studies new cross-domain data mining methods based on user interests in social media. By modeling cross-domain user interests and mining complex cross-domain correlations, the thesis improves the performance of cross-domain data mining methods and lays a foundation for the practical application of cross-domain data mining research. The detailed research and achievements are as follows:
(1)	Focusing on the problem of the complex coiTelations between crossdomain information caused by the heterogeneity of cross-domain data, a crossdomain user identity linkage method based on user interests with heterogeneous cross-domain data, is studied. In order to uniformly capture correlations between cross-domain data from heterogeneous feature spaces, a cross-domain user identity linkage method based on linked heterogeneous network embedding is proposed. The method designs a linked heterogeneous network to describe the complex cross-domain correlations, and achieves the fusion ofhetero-geneous data by jointly capturing intra-network and inter-network user-interest information based on content topics and social relations in the same interest space, which can help learn the complete representations of cross-domain user interests. Meanwhile, a joint training algorithm based on negative sampling is designed to alternately train heterogeneous relations for further improving model performance and training efficiency. The experimental results show the performance of the proposed method increased by at least 19% compared to the method that assumes that different types of cross-domain information are independent of each other, which proves that the performance of cross-domain user identify linkage methods can be effectively improved by fully mining the correlations between different types of cross-domain information.
(2)	Aiming at the problem of insufficient coiTelations between cross-domain infomiation caused by the anonymization of cross-domain data, a cross-domain recommendation method based on user interests with anonymous cross-domain data, is studied. Since users only obtain a small amount of behavioral data when they are anonymous, a cross-domain recommendation method based on crossdomain heterogeneous relation embedding is proposed for supplementing the missing related information. Firstly, the method uses the co-clustering algorithm to mine cluster-level inter-domain links to supplement the inter-domain correlations. Then, the con-elations between cross-domain information is further enriched by jointly embedding the cross-domain heterogeneous item-item and item-cluster relation. Finally, a complete cross-domain interest representation can be obtained by combining the cross-domain fragmented information. In addition, the model can be efficiently optimized and trained by designing a joint training strategy based on heterogeneous relations. The experimental results show the performance of the proposed method increased by at least 11% compared to the traditional single-domain recommendation and cross-domain recommendation methods with anonymous users, even when 50% information is lost and users are anonymous. It proves that the missing cross-domain information can be compensated to improve the recommendation performance by fully mining hidden cross-domain correlations.
(3)	For the problem of complex dynamic correlations between cross-domain infomiation caused by the dynamicity of cross-domain data, a cross-domain recommendation method based on user interests with dynamic cross-domain data, is studied. Firstly, considering the differences between the cross-domain global dynamics and the single-domain local dynamics of cross-domain information, a cross-domain recommendation method based on the hierarchical recurrent neural networks, which jointly models the cross-domain global evolution patterns and single-domain local dynamic patterns of user interests for fully capturing the dynamic correlations of user interests, is designed. Secondly, in order to solve the problem of losing some links between single-domain behaviors when
vn
capturing dynamics of cross-domain information, a cross-domain recommendation method based on cross-domain recurrent-gated neural networks is proposed. The method can efifectively recover lost single-domain behavioral links from long-term and short-term interest perspectives, while captures the global evolution patterns and local dynamic patterns of user interests. The experimental results show the performance of the two proposed methods increased by at least 8% compared to the existing single-domain recommendation and crossdomain recommendation methods based on dynamic data, which proves that the recommendation performance can be effectively improved by accurately capturing the dynamic correlations of cross-domain information.
KEY WORDS: social media, user interests, cross-domain data mining, crossdomain recommendations, cross-domain user identity linkage

