摘要
投诉是客户对网络质量满意度的直接反馈，用户出现投诉可以为 网络覆盖和网络优化提供了指导。将网络关键指标数据与用户投诉数 据进行关联，一方面可以从投诉的角度去探究网络质量的变化情况, 另一方面也从网络指标的变化过程深度挖掘造成投诉的主要原因。对 用户投诉预警问题进行研究，有助于网络运营部门更好的解决网络问 题、提高客户满意度以及提升网络运营部门利润等。
本文针对LTE及WLAN两种网络环境进行研究，分析了课题的 研究背景、研究意义以及国内外研究现状，并阐述了投诉预警研究中 相关的通信基础理论和机器学习算法。
一方面，本文针对LTE网络，将LTE网络环境下的网络指标数据 与用户投诉数据进行关联，建立一种LTE网络环境下的用户投诉预 警模型，先于用户投诉发掘LTE网络中出现的问题，实现小区级的用 户投诉预警。本文的LTE网络用户投诉预警模型包括数据关联、样本 筛选和投诉预测三个部分。数据关联部分是将用户投诉数据与LTE网 络指标数据通过时间和CI进行关联，样本筛选部分是基于邻域算法 对样本数据进行修正，投诉预测部分基于BP网络建立模型对客户投 诉进行预测。我们用Python对LTE网络环境下的投诉预警模型进行 了实验，并在实验中将该投诉模型与传统分类模型的预测效果进行了 对比，结果证明相对于传统模型，该LTE网络环境下设计的投诉预警 模型的预测效果更好，预测准确度达到了 86.9%。
另一方面，本文针对WLAN网络，将WLAN网络环境下的用户 投诉数据与网络指标数据进行关联，建立一种WLAN网络环境下的 用户投诉预警模型，并先于WLAN用户投诉发掘网络出现的问题， 实现AP级的用户投诉预警。本文的WLAN网络用户投诉预警模型 同样包括数据关联、样本筛选和投诉预测三个部分。数据关联部分是 将用户投诉数据与WLAN网络指标数据通过经纬度以及时间进行关 联，样本筛选部分同样是基于邻域算法对样本进行修正，投诉预警部 分是将BP网络算法和AdaBoost算法进行结合并建立预测模型对投 诉进行预测。我们用Python对WLAN网络环境下的投诉预警模型进 行了实验，并在实验中将该WLAN网络下设计的新的投诉模型与LTE
网络环境下设计的模型进行对比，对比结果证明该WLAN环境下的 模型的预测效果更好，预测准确度达到了 91.6%。
关键词：LTE网络WLAN网络用户投诉投诉预警预测算法
RESEARCH ON THE COMPLAINT WARNING PROBLEM IN LTE AND WLAN
ABSTRACT
Complaint is the most direct feedback of customer satisfaction to network quality, the appearance of complaint can confirm the deterioration of network health condition, and provide important guidance fbr network coverage and network optimization. By coirelating the network KPI data with the customer complaint data, we can explore the change of network quality from the point of view of complaint, and on the other hand, we can find out the main reasons for the complaint from the changes of network metrics. Research on the customer complaint warning issue is helpful for network Operation Department to solve network problem, improve customer satisfaction and improve profit of network operation department.
The current research focuses on the two kinds of network environments such as LTE and WLAN, analyzes the research background, research significance and research status, elaborates the related communication basic theory and machine learning algorithm in the research of the complaint warning.
On the one hand, this article aims at LTE network, we associate the network KPI data with the customer complaint data and establish a Novel Warning Complaints Model in LTE, before the customer complains to discover the problems appearing in the LTE network and realizes the celllevel customer's complaint warning. The complaint warning model in LTE includes three parts: data association, sample screening and complaint prediction. The Data Association part correlates the network KPI data with the customer complaint data in LTE through time and CL The sample screening part is based on the neighborhood algorithm to modify the sample data. The complaint prediction part is based on the BP neural network algorithm. We use Python to simulate the model of the complaint early warning in LTE network environment and compare the complaint
warning model with traditional classification models in the experiment. The comparison results show that the complaint warning model in LTE network environment is better than the traditional model in predicting precision and the prediction effect is good, and can reach 86,9% .
On the other hand, this article also aims at WLAN network, we associate the network KPI data with the customer complaint data and establish a Novel Warning Complaints Model in WLAN, before the customer complains to discover the problems appearing in the WLAN network and realizes the AP-level customer's complaint warning. The complaint warning model in WLAN includes three parts: data association, sample screening and complaint prediction. The Data Association part correlates the network KPI data with the customer complaint data in WLAN through longitude and latitude data and CI. The sample screening part is also based on the neighborhood algorithm to modify the sample data. The complaint prediction part is based on the BP neural network and the AdaBoost algorithm. We use Python to simulate the model of the complaint early warning in WLAN network environment and compare the complaint warning model designed in LTE network with the new complaint warning model designed in LTE network. The comparison results show that the predicting precision of the new complaint warning model in WLAN network environment is improved and the prediction effect is good, and can reach 91.6 %.
KEY WORDS: LTE Network WLAN Network Customer Complaint Complaint Warning Prediction Algorithm
