摘要
无线通信给人类带来的进步是无可争议的，它的发展和应用使信息 交流变得极其高效。无线通信的应用领域在不断扩展中，随着人们生活 水平的不断提高，需求也在提高，因此提高无线通信的速度和质量，是 无线通信研究者们一直在追求的目标。在这过程中，学者们需要克服多 道难关，其中由模拟器件引起的系统非理想特性，如I/Q不平衡、功放 非线性等，在一定程度上降低了通信的质量，故对系统非理想特性的估 计和补偿成为学者们研究的重要领域之一。
单载波频域均衡系统（SC-FDE）将时域均衡转换到频域均衡，不 仅能有效克服码间干扰，并且大大降低了实现复杂度。SC-FDE相比 OFDM不存在峰平比的问题，同时具有其它的一些优势，但其性能不可 避免的受I/Q不平衡、功放非线性等非理想特性的影响，所以设计性能 良好的非理想特性的检测和补偿方案必不可少。本文从IQ不平衡和功 率放大器非线性两个方面，对低信噪比MIMO SC-FDE系统链路中的非 理想特性进行研究。
首先针对功率放大器非线性的研究，本文介绍了几种建模方式，并 分析了非线性特性对传输信号的影响，从而能明确我们研究数字预失真 技术的必要性。其中，我们基于记忆多项式模型对MIMO SC-FDE中的 功放非线性进行建模，利用数字预失真技术在低信噪比系统条件下进行 非理想特性的补偿。
之后，针对MIMO SC-FDE系统中IQ不平衡问题，分别从发射端 和接收端对系统中的IQ不平衡应用估计和补偿算法。在发射端上变频 阶段进行I/Q不平衡预补偿的算法，主要采用了两种用于估计预失真滤 波器的算法，分别是二阶统计法和WL-LS估计法，两种技术都是利用 调制器输出返回到数字基带的反馈信号进行参数估计。另外，在接收端 下变频阶段进行I/Q不平衡补偿的算法，该算法建立在复杂随机信号的 二阶统计特性正则特性上，通过恢复观测信号的正则特性来对信号进行
I/Q不平衡盲补偿。
本文最后基于实验室已有的C语言系统平台和硬件平台给出了 MIMOSC-FDE系统的实现方案，通过C语言仿真实现和硬件实现，验 证本文方案的可行性。
关键词 低信噪比 MIMOSC-FDE系统I/Q不平衡 数字预失真
RESEARCH ON DETECTION AND COMPENSATION TECHNOLOGY OF NON-IDEAL CHARACTERISTICS IN COMMUNICATION LINK OF LOW SNR
ABSTRACT
The progress that wireless communication brings to mankind is indisputable, for its development and application make the information exchange extremely efficient. The application of wireless communication is expanding. With the improvement of people's living standards, the demand is also increasing. Therefore, improving the speed and quality of wireless communication is the goal that wireless communication researchers have been pursuing. In this process, scholars need to overcome many difficulties. Among them, the non-ideal characteristics of the system caused by analog devices, such as I/Q imbalance, power amplifier nonlinearity, and son on, reduce the quality of communication to a certain extent. So the estimation and compensation of the non-ideal characteristics of the system has become one of the important fields for scholars to study.
Single carrier frequency domain equalization system (SC-FDE) converts time domain equalization to frequency domain equalization, which can not only overcome ISI effectively, but also reduce the complexity of implementation. Without PAPR, compared with OFDM, SC-FDE also has some other advantages. However, its perfbimance is affected by non-ideal characteristics inevitably such as I/Q imbalance and power amplifier nonlinearity. So it is necessary to design a detection and compensation scheme fbr non-ideal characteristics with good performance. In this paper, the non-ideal characteristics of MIMO SC-FDE links are studied from the aspects of IQ imbalance and power amplifier nonlinearity.
Firstly, in order to study the nonlinearity of power amplifier, this paper introduces several modeling methods and analyzes the influence of nonlinear characteristics on the transmitted signal, which can clarify the necessity of studying digital pre-distortion technology. We use memory polynomial model to model the power amplifier nonlinearity in MIMO SC-FDE, and use digital pre-distortion technology to compensate for non-ideal characteristics.
Then, for the problem of IQ imbalance in MIMO SC-FDE system, the estimation and compensation algorithms are proposed from the transmitter and the receiver respectively. In the transmitter, we propose two algorithms, the second-order statistics method and the WL-LS estimation method, which both use the feedback signal returned to the digital baseband from the modulator to estimate the parameters. In addition, in the receiver, the algorithm of I/Q imbalance compensation is based on the propemess of the second-order statistical characteristics of complex random signals, then I/Q imbalance can be compensated blindly by restoring the propemess of observed signal.
Finally, based on the existing C language system platform and hardware platform in the laboratory, the implementation scheme of MIMO SC-FDE system is given. The feasibility of the schemes are verified by C language simulation and hardware implementation.
KEY WORDS low SNR MIMO SC-FDE system I/Q imbalance
