摘要
目标检测是计算机视觉领域中最基础的任务之一，包含分类与定 位两大技术难题。近年来，深度学习和卷积神经网络技术的快速发展, 更是将目标检测的性能推向了一个新高度。但小目标的检测依旧面临 巨大挑战。论文针对小目标检测中特征和内容表示不充分的问题，分 别从特征尺度和内容维度提出优化方案，提升小目标的检测性能。
小目标检测的质量依赖于图像特征图的提取和高层语义信息的 处理。针对FasterR-CNN,论文提出了特征尺度融合和特征尺度增强 优化结构。其中，特征尺度融合模块通过通道数叠加的方式实现了不 同尺度特征层的融合，并且采用的超像素卷积并不会引入计算量。基 于多尺度感受野和通道注意力的特征尺度增强模块确保了特征图的 稳健，有效的解决了小目标经过卷积网络后特征表达不足的问题。实 验证明，所提出的方法对小目标检测任务具备优异性能。
小目标检测的质量还依赖于目标内容的分布。论文首先引入清洁 度概念，并釆用GHM Loss的思想改进损失函数，不仅改善了 RPN 网络中正负样本不均衡的问题，而且还能大大缩小简单样本与困难样 本在数量上的巨大差距。然后提出了小目标数据增强算法，包括基于 旋转的数据集增强策略和基于掩膜的小目标实例增强策略。不仅使得 数据集和目标实例得到扩充，而且保证训练样本有一定区别。实验证 明，优化后的算法能够大幅度提升小目标的检测性能。
关键词:小目标检测;特征尺度融合;特征尺度增强;样本均衡;数据增强
RESEARCH ON THE APPLICATION OF SMALL OBJECT DETECTION TECHNOLOGY BASED ON DEEP LEARNING ALGORITHM
ABSTRACT
Object detection is one of the most basic tasks in the field of computer vision, including two technical problems of classification and location. In recent years, the rapid development of deep learning and convolution neural network technology has pushed the performance of object detection to a new height. However, the detection of small object still faces great challenges. Aiming at the problem of insufficient feature and content representation in small object detection, this thesis proposes optimization schemes from feature scale and content dimension respectively to improve the detection performance of small object.
The quality of small object detection depends on the extraction of feature map and the processing of high-level semantic information. For Faster R-CNN, an optimized network of feature scale fusion and enhancement is proposed. The feature scale fusion module realizes the fusion of different scale feature layers by the way of channel number superposition, and the super-pixel convolution adopted does not introduce the calculation amount. The feature scale enhancement module based on multi-scale receptive field and channel attention ensure the robustness of the feature map. The feature map at the top of the optimization network has both the details of the bottom layer and the semantic information of the top layer, which effectively solves the problem of insufficient feature expression of small objects after convolution network. Experiments show that the proposed method has excellent performance for small object detection tasks.
The quality of small object detection also depends on the distribution of object content. Firstly, the concept of cleanliness is introduced, and then,
GHM Loss is used to improve the loss function. It not only improves the imbalance of positive and negative samples in RPN, but also greatly reduces the huge gap between simple samples and difficult samples in quantity. Then, a small object data enhancement algorithm is proposed, including the data set enhancement strategy based on rotation and the small object instance enhancement strategy based on mask. Not only the data set and the object instance are expanded, but also the training samples are different. Experiments show that the optimized algorithm can greatly improve the detection performance of small objects.
KEY WORDS:small object detection;feature scale fusion;feature scale enhancement;data enhancement;sample equalization
