摘要
智能交通系统(Intelligent Transportation System, ITS)的快速发 展对车联网提出了更高的要求，车辆部署的各种传感器需要实时传输 大量的传感信息，同时各种车联网服务(包括交通安全类、交通效率 类、车辆信息类和车载娱乐类等)爆发式增长，这都需要车辆通信能 够支持Gbps的数据速率，但是分配给车联网的无线频谱资源由于带 宽受限无法满足要求，而位于10GHz-300GHz频段的毫米波具有大带 宽的特点能够支持高数据速率和低延迟的传输，因此毫米波通信成为 未来车联网通信的关键候选技术。固定的频谱资源分配方式不能充分 利用毫米波频谱资源，使用认知无线电(Cognitive Radio, CR)的频 谱感知技术能够获取频谱空闲/占用状态以实现动态频谱共享，提高 频谱资源使用效率。因此，在使用毫米波通信的车联网中对频谱感知 的研究十分必要。
论文选题来源于国家自然科学基金项目“密集异构无线环境下极 化资源感知与利用”(项目编号：61571062)o本文基于毫米波信号不 同于低频段信号的特点以及车联网中的车辆移动性对认知车联网中 的毫米波频谱感知展开研究，分别提岀了用于本地感知的基于相关性 的毫米波频谱感知算法和用于合作感知的基于最优合作用户与D-S (Dempster-Shafer)融合的合作感知算法。本文的主要研究内容和贡 献如下：
针对现有的毫米波频谱感知算法未能根据毫米波信号特点进行 建模且难以适应车联网的移动性的问题，本文提出了一种基于相关性 的毫米波频谱感知算法。根据毫米波的波束成形技术、毫米波的干扰 -噪声受限特点分析认知用户接收信号的形式，建立频谱感知二元假 设模型，采用似然比来推导检验统计量。然后根据车辆移动性带来的 相关性构建新的观测量，并推导新的检验统计量，实现基于多次感知 周期检验统计量的检测。从理论上推导该算法所能实现的虚警概率、 检测概率。最后通过MATLAB仿真验证所提算法的性能，并与已有 的基于随机过程的毫米波频谱感知算法性能进行对比分析。在本课题 的仿真场景中，所提的基于相关性的毫米波频谱感知算法在信噪比为 OdB时能达到0.99的检测概率。
针对现有的合作毫米波频谱感知算法难以正确选择出合作用户 且不能应对本地感知不确定性的问题，本文提出了一种基于最优合作 用户与D-S融合的合作频谱感知算法。首先，根据认知用户的感知信 号相似度以及群移动模式相似度对合作用户进行筛选，以群移动模式 相彳以度为限制条件，最大化合作用户的感知结果相似度来建立最优合 作用户选择的优化问题，通过自适应遗传算法求解出合作用户组。随 后，基于噪声和干扰的不确定性计算各合作用户的本地感知不确定性, 融合中心根据此不确定性通过D-S融合方法进行融合并做出全局判 决。最后，通过MATLAB仿真验证所提算法的性能，并于已有的合 作毫米波频谱感知算法进行对比，在本课题的仿真场景中，所提的基 于最优合作用户与D-S融合的合作频谱感知算法在信噪比为-10dB时 能达到0.90的检测概率，信噪比在-5dB时能达到0.99的检测概率。
关键词:车联网;认知无线电;毫米波;频谱感知;移动性

RESEARCH ON MM WAVE SPECTRUM SENSING ALGORITHM IN COGNITIVE VEHICULAR NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
The development of Intelligent Transportation System (Intelligent Transportation System, ITS) requires high level techniques upon vehicular networks. Various sensors deployed on vehicles need to transport a large number of sensing information in real time, and at the same time all kinds of vehicular services (including the traffic safety services, traffic efficiency services, vehicular information services and on-board entertainment services, etc.) grow explosively. These require vehicular communication to support Gbps data rate. However, wireless spectrum resources assigned to vehicular networks cannot meet this requirement due to the limited bandwidth. There is large bandwidth at millimeter wave (10GHz-300GHz) which can support high data rate and low delay transmission, so mm Wave (millimeter wave) communication becomes a key candidate technology for vehicular communication in the future. Fixed assignment of spectrum resources makes the mm Wave spectrum resources used inefficiently. Spectrum sensing of cognitive radio (CR) can acquire the state of spectrum (idle/occupied) to realize dynamic spectrum sharing. Therefore, it is necessary to study spectrum sensing in vehicular networks where vehicles use mmWave spectrum to communicate.
This thesis is supported by Chinese National Nature Science Foundation Project "Sensing and utilization of polarization resource in dense heterogeneous wireless environment" (No. 61571062). Based on the characteristics of mmWave signals and vehicular mobility in vehicular networks, algorithms of mmWave spectrum sensing in cognitive vehicular networks are studied in this thesis. A correlation based mmWave spectrum sensing algorithm is proposed for local sensing and an optimal cooperating
HI
users and D-S fusion based cooperative spectrum sensing algorithm is proposed for cooperative sensing. The main research contents and contributions of this thesis are as follows:
As for local mm Wave spectrum sensing in cognitive vehicular networks, exiting algorithms do not build spectrum sensing model according to the characteristics of millimeter wave signal and cannot adapt to mobility of vehicles in vehicular networks. To solve this problem, a correlation based mm Wave spectrum sensing algorithm is proposed in this thesis. According to the beamforming technology of mm Wave and the interference and noise limited regime of mm Wave, the expression of the signal received by the cognitive user is analyzed and the binary hypothesis model of spectrum sensing is established, and the test statistics are derived by likelihood ratio. Then, the new observation variable is constructed according to the correlation as a result of vehicular mobility, and new test statistics are derived to realize the detection based on the test statistics of multiple sensing cycles. The probability of false alarm and the probability of detection which can be realized by this algorithm are deduced theoretically. Finally, the performance of the proposed algorithm is verified by MATLAB simulation, and compared with the performance of existing mm Wave spectrum sensing algorithm based on random process. In the simulation scenario of this thesis, while SNR is OdB, the probability of detection of the proposed mm Wave spectrum sensing algorithm can be 0.99.
As for cooperative mm Wave spectrum sensing in cognitive vehicular networks, it is difficult for exiting algorithms to choose optimal cooperative users and to cope with the uncertainty of local sensing. To solve this problem, a cooperative spectrum sensing algorithm based on optimal cooperative users and D-S fusion is proposed in this thesis. First of all, according to the similarity of sensing results of cognitive users and similarity of the group mobility of cognitive users, users that participate in cooperation are chose. The maximization problem for choosing optimal cooperative users is established by maximizing similarity of sensing results of cognitive users while ensuring the group mobility of cognitive users to satisfy the restricted condition. The optimal cooperative users are obtained
IV
through adaptive genetic algorithm. Then, based on the uncertainty of noise and interference, the uncertainty of the local sensing of cooperative users is calculated. Based on this uncertainty, the fusion center fuses sensing results from cooperative users through D-S fusion and then makes a global decision. Finally, the performance of the proposed algorithm is verified by MATLAB simulation. Compared with the existing cooperative perception algorithm, this algorithm has better performance. In the simulation scenario of this thesis, while SNR is -lOdB, the probability of detection of the proposed mmWave spectrum sensing algorithm can be 0.90 and while SNR is -5dB, it can be 0.99.
KEY WORDS:vehicular networks;cognitive radio;millimeter wave;spectrum sensing;mobility
