摘要
随着互联网的快速发展，现有的网络体系结构已经难以满足社会 的需要，网络僵化问题日益严重。网络虚拟化技术能够将底层网络资 源抽象化，允许多个虚拟网络共存于同一底层网络中，是应对网络僵 化的有效手段。虚拟网络映射问题是网络虚拟化领域的关键问题，其 主要目标是将带有多种约束条件的虚拟网络请求映射到底层网络上, 并尽可能地使网络运营商的收益最大化。
利用单一的启发式算法解决虚拟网络映射问题存在着容易陷入 局部最优值与收敛速度较慢等缺陷，本文提出了基于粒子群思想的元 胞遗传虚拟网络映射算法，该算法利用带有演化规则的元胞自动机对 传统遗传算法中的选择操作进行改造，使得交叉与变异操作只在元胞 邻域内发生，从而降低了超级解的扩散性，提高了算法的全局寻优能 力。针对元胞遗传算法收敛速度较慢的缺陷，本文设计了一种基于粒 子群算法思想的变异算子，通过引导变异点的选择，有效地消除了变 异操作的盲目性，加快了算法的收敛速度。仿真结果表明，该算法可 以有效地提高虚拟网络请求接受率与底层网络收益等评价指标。
在静态虚拟网络的映射算法中，底层网络为虚拟网络请求分配资 源的方案是固定的。实际上，随着虚拟网络请求不断地到来或离去， 底层网络的资源碎片化问题愈发严重，虚拟网络请求的接受率也随之 降低。因此，对虚拟网络进行动态重映射是十分必要的。在底层网络 中，不同重要性的节点对于网络连通性的影响力大小不同，现有的虚 拟网络重映射算法没有对底层节点的重要性进行区分，容易在重映射 后出现新的资源瓶颈问题。本文提出了一种基于节点重要性的虚拟网 络重映射算法，该算法通过一种全新的综合多维度属性的节点重要性 评价指标对底层节点的重要性进行区分，周期性地将高负载的重要节 点上的部分虚拟节点重新映射到低负载的非重要节点上，并对其关联 的虚拟链路进行重映射，以降低底层网络资源的碎片化程度。仿真结 果表明，该算法在提高虚拟网络请求接受率与降低重映射链路资源开 销等方面均优于现有的虚拟网络重映射算法。
关键词:虚拟网络映射;元胞遗传算法;粒子群算法;虚拟网络重映射
RESEARCH ON ALGORITHMS FOR DYNAMIC VIRTUAL NETWORK EMBEDDING PROBLEMS
ABSTRACT
With the rapid growth of the Internet, the current network architecture has been difficult to meet the demands of the human society, and the problem of network rigidity is becoming increasingly serious. Network virtualization technology can abstract the underlying network resources and allow multiple virtual networks to coexist in the same underlying physical network, which is an effective means to deal with network rigidity. The problem of virtual network embedding is a key issue in the field of network virtualization. Its main objective is to embed the virtual network requests with various constraints into the underlying network and maximize the profits of network operators.
Using a single heuristic algorithm to solve the virtual network embedding problem has some defects, such as easy to fall into the local optimal value and slow convergence speed. This paper proposes a cellular genetic virtual network embedding algorithm with particle swarm optimization, which uses cellular automata with evolution rules to transform the selection operation of traditional genetic algorithm, so that the cross operation and mutation operation only occur in the cell neighborhood, thereby reducing the diffusion of the super solution and improving the global optimization ability of the algorithm. Aiming at the slower convergence speed of the cellular genetic algorithm, this paper designs a mutation operator based on the idea of particle swarm optimization. By guiding the selection of mutation points, it effectively eliminates the blindness of mutation operation and accelerates the convergence speed of the algorithm. The experimental results indicate that the algorithm can efficiently increase the acceptance rate of virtual network requests and the underlying network revenue compared with the existing virtual network embedding algorithm.
In the static virtual network embedding algorithm, the scheme that the underlying network allocates resources for virtual network requests is fixed. In fact, with the continuous arrival or departure of virtual network requests, the problem of resource fragmentation in the underlying network becomes more and more serious, and the acceptance rate of virtual network requests also decreases. Therefore,辻 is necessary to dynamically reconfigure the virtual network. In the underlying network, nodes of different importance have different influence on the network connectivity. The existing virtual network reconfiguration algorithms do not distinguish the importance of the underlying nodes, which is easy to cause new resource bottlenecks after reconfiguration. In this paper, a virtual network reconfiguration algorithm based on node importance is proposed. The algorithm distinguishes the importance of the underlying nodes by a new node importance evaluation index which integrates multi-dimensional attributes. Periodically, some virtual nodes on the important nodes with high load are remapped into the non-important nodes with low load, and the associated virtual links are reconstructed in order to reduce the fragmentation of the underlying network resources. Simulation results show that the algorithm is superior to the existing virtual network reconfiguration algorithms in improving the virtual network request acceptance rate and reducing the cost of remapping link resources.
KEY WORDS: virtual network embedding;cellular genetic algorithm;particle swarm algorithm;virtual network reconfiguration
