摘要
随着电子工业的进步，印刷电路板(PCB)上的信号频率日益升 高。同时，PCB的尺寸、驱动电压幅度、信号的上升/下降时间等参 数都呈现降低趋势，因此信号完整性和电源完整性逐渐成为PCB设 计阶段需要格外关注的条件。目前常见的方法是基于场分析法的全波 仿真方法，这类方法往往需要较长的分析时间。为了缩短PCB反射、 串扰和电源/地平面的仿真时间，本课题主要研究了以下方面的工作：
(1) 分析了高速印刷电路板设计中反射的形成原因，依靠过孔的 经典建模方法计算了过孔在等效电路模型中的相关参数，分析高频信 号造成的趋肤效应对于传输线特征参数的影响，使用矩量法计算了高 频信号下的传输线特征参数，按照传输线拓扑结构将各元素依次级联 得到等效电路模型，并在ADS软件中等效电路进行分析，其仿真结 果与PCB全波仿真结果作了对比，在保证精度的前提下大大提高了 反射问题的分析效率。
(2) 分析了印刷电路板中与串扰有关的因素，并在仿真软件中通 过控制变量法对其进行了验证。编写了一个可以对PCB文件实现完 全读取的工具，建立PCB的元素集合。将可以造成影响的因素从PCB 网络的拓扑拓扑结构中抽取出来，定义为一种数据格式，根据该数据 格式对超过30块PCB板进行量化，同时对电路板进行批量化仿真， 根据仿真结果对读取结果进行标记，所得数据集可以用于训练能快速 实现大批量串扰仿真的机器学习算法。与全波仿真软件中的结果对比, 其结果在拥有超过70%准确率的情况下，能够大幅提升仿真效率。
(3) 分析了 PCB电源分配系统各组成部分的电路原理。总结了电 源/地平面中噪声的类型和产生原因，并通过仿真验证了单个过孔对 电源/地平面的影响。根据低频驱动下平行双片的电特性，建立了一 种通过电路仿真来实现电源/地平面仿真的方法。与Cadence多节点 仿真相比，这种方法具有很高的效率。
关键词:PCB;反射;串扰;电源/地平面
RESEARCH OF MODELING METHOD FOR SIGNAL AND POWER INTEGRITY OF HIGH SPEED PCB
ABSTRACT
With the development of the electronics industry, the signal frequency on the printed circuit board (PCB) is getting higher and higher. At the same time, PCB size, driving voltage range and signal rise/fell time parameters all show a decreasing trend. Therefore, signal integrity and power integrity gradually become the conditions that need extra attention in PCB design stage. At present, the common method is the full wave simulation method based on the field analysis method. This kind of method often needs a long time. In order to shorten the simulation time of PCB reflection, crosstalk and power/ground plane, the following aspects are mainly cotained in this paper:
(1) The author analyzed the reflection in higli-speed PCB design, summarized the equivalent method of PCB conductor field analysis, calculated the relevant parameters of tlirough-hole in the equivalent circuit model, and then according to the topology of transmission line, successively cascaded each element to obtain the equivalent circuit model. The author analyzed the equivalent circuit according to the Scattering matrix, put the circuit tlie equivalent circuit in ADS. The simulation results are compared with those of PCB full-wave simulation, which greatly improves the analysis efficiency of reflection problem on the premise of ensuring accuracy.
(2) The author analyzed the factors related to crosstalk in PCB, and verified them in tlie software with control variable method. The author extracted the influencing factors from the topology structure of PCB network and defined them as a data fonnat. According to the data format, the author quantified more than 30 PCB boards and simulated them, Based on the simulation results, the resulting data sets can be used to train machine learning algorithms which can quickly implement mass crosstalk simulation. Compared with those in full-wave simulation software, the result can greatly improve the simulation efficiency under the condition that the accuracy rate is more than 70%.
(3) The author analyzes the circuit principle of each component of PCB power distribution system, summarized the types and causes of noise in the power supply/ground plane, and verified the influence of single hole on the power supply/ground plane by simulation. According to the electrical characteristics of pai-allel dual plates driven by low frequency, proposed a method of power supply/ground plane simulation by circuit simulation. Compared with Cadence software, this method has high efficiency.
KEY WORDS:PCB;reflection;crosstalk power;supply/ground plane
