摘要
随着智能制造的快速发展，工业生产和大数据技术结合越来越紧 密，逐渐形成了工业大数据这个新的研究领域。工业大数据技术蓬勃 发展，众多传感器、控制器等设备采集的大量数据为故障预测与健康 管理(Prognostics and Health Management, PHM)提供了 数据支持。 其中剩余使用寿命预测(Remaining Useful Life, RUL)技术通过预测工 业装备部件的剩余工作时间，可以在装备发生故障之前进行部件的更 换和维护，这对于工业生产效率的提高和安全性的确保有重要意义。 近年来，人工智能中的机器学习、深度学习等技术被广泛用于解决剩 余使用寿命预测问题。然而，在真实的工业生产环境下，工业设备往 往处于不同的工作状况，工况的改变会导致传感器采集的数据在分布 上发生变化，线下训练模型的数据和线上测试模型的数据往往会存在 差异，甚至训练数据和测试数据都会包含多种分布。目前许多机器学 习方法基于一个前提：训练数据和测试数据来自相同的特征空间，且 具有相同的分布。因此当数据分布发生变化时，模型的预测性能往往 会变差，特别是当训练数据和测试数据都包含多种分布时，这导致了 剩余使用寿命预测模型的泛化性变差。
针对这个问题，本文提出了一种基于多工况条件下领域自适应方 法(Domain Adaptation method under Multiple Operation Conditions, DAMOC)的剩余使用寿命预测算法。提出的模型基于迁移学习中的领 域自适应技术，采用了基于多工况的样本差异度量方法，首先利用稀 疏自编码器将源域和目标域映射到新的特征空间，在新的特征空间利 用提岀的样本差异度量方法计算源域和目标域的差异，并将该差异作 为损失函数的一项进行最小化，从而在训练过程中缩小了训练集与测 试集在新的特征空间中的分布差异。此外，实验表明了损失函数中不 同工况的权重分配会对模型的性能产生影响。该模型能够在训练过程 中定量计算各工况的相对重要性，在损失函数中对不同工况分配相应 的权重，实现动态域自适应。本文提出的剩余使用寿命预测模型和其 它多种预测模型在刀具和轴承数据集上进行了比较，实验结果证明了 所提岀模型的有效性和可靠性。
同时，结合工厂实际的运维需求，本文从工程应用的角度，将提 出的RUL预测算法进行工程实现，设计并实现了基于微信小程序的 工业设备运维系统。该系统主要功能是利用本文提出的RUL预测算 法对设备进行预测性维护和管理。同时，系统包含了任务管理、历史 数据统计、设备资产管理等功能，大大提高了运维管理人员的工作效 率，实现了工业设备的智能化管理。
关键词:迁移学习;剩余使用寿命预测;工况;工业设备运维
RESEARCH AND APPLICATION OF REMAINING USEFUL LIFE PREDICTION MODEL OF INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT COMPONENTS BASED ON TRANSFER LEARNING
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of intelligent manufacturing, industrial production and big data technology are more and more closely integrated, thus a new research field of industrial big data is formed. Industrial big data technology is developing vigorously, and a large amount of data collected by many sensors, controllers and other equipment provides data support for fault prediction and health management (PHM). The remaining useful life (RUL) technology predicts the remaining working time of industrial equipment, and can replace and maintain the equipment before the equipment is damaged, which is of great significance to the improvement of industrial production efficiency and safety. However, in a real industrial production environment, industrial equipment is often in different operation conditions, and changes in operation conditions will result in changes in data distribution. Therefore, the data used to train the model and the data used to test the model are often different, even Both the training dataset and the test dataset contain multiple distributions. However, many machine learning methods are based on a premise: the training dataset and the test dataset come from the same feature space and have the same distribution. Therefore, when the data distribution changes, the prediction performance of the model tends to deteriorate, especially when both the training set and the test set contain multiple distributions, which leads to poor generalization of the remaining service life prediction model.
To solve this problem, this thesis proposes a Domain Adaptation method under Multiple Operation Conditions (DAMOC). Based on the domain adaptation technique in transfer learning, this model proposes a method for measuring the distribution discrepancy of different data based on the multiple operation conditions. Firstly, the Sparse Auto-Encoder (SAE) is used to map the source domain and the target domain to a new feature space. In the new feature space, the distribution discrepancy between the source domain and the target domain is calculated by using the proposed measurement method, and the discrepancy is minimized as a term of the loss function, so as to reduce the distribution discrepancy between the source domain and the target domain in the new feature space. In addition, a large number of experiments show that the contribution of different operation conditions in transfer learning process is different. The model can quantitatively evaluate the relative importance of each operation condition and conduct the dynamic domain adaptation. The RUL prediction model proposed in this paper is compared with other prediction models on tool and bearing datasets. The experimental results show that the proposed model is effective and reliable.
Meanwhile, after considering the actual needs of operation and maintenance, the proposed model is implemented to apply in industrial operation and maintenance management. This paper designs and implements the industrial equipment operation and maintenance system based on wechat applet combined with equipment condition monitoring technology. The main function of the system is based on the RUL prediction algorithm proposed in this paper to conduct maintenance and management of equipment. Meanwhile, the system includes task management, historical data statistics, equipment asset management and other functions, which greatly improves the work efficiency managers and realizes the intelligent management of industrial equipment.
KEY WORDS: transfer learning;remaining useful life prediction;operation condition; maintenance of industrial equipment
