摘要
近年来，随着5G商业化的大力推进，5G大规模多入多出 (Multiple Input Multiple Output, MIMO)天线设备的市场占有率逐 渐提升。与此同时，大规模MIMO技术的提出给5G设备的测试带来 了新的难题，进一步制约了 5G设备的推广和量产。因此，暗室多探 头法作为能够在理论上复现任意目标信道的MIMO设备空口测试 (Over-the-Air testing, OTA testing)方案，已经成为业界研究的重点。 预衰落合成法是暗室多探头法中重要的信道重构技术，它的主要思想 在于利用有限数量的探头，在测试区域内部合成目标信道的空间特性。 然而，由于5G设备的新特性，导致了预衰落合成法在信道重构方面 存在着新的挑战。因此，本文分别从效率和精度这两个方面，对预衰 落合成法进行了研究。
首先，暗室多探头法一个重要的挑战就是降低系统成本。由于系 统中的每一个探头需要连接到昂贵的信道模拟器上，过多的探头数量 会大幅提高系统成本，因此需要进行探头选择来减少系统中所需探头 的数量。然而，在5G MIMO OTA测试中，由于备选探头数量的增加， 导致探头选择算法的复杂度大幅上升，严重影响了信道重构的效率。 本文提出了一个高效的探头选择算法，相较于主流的凸优化算法能够 大幅减小计算复杂度。算法的主要思想是通过计算目标问题的梯度， 并利用动量梯度下降来进行探头权重的优化。为了在迭代的同时进行 探头的选择，该算法在目标函数中加入了正则化函数。并通过在迭代 过程中对参数的动态调整，保证了算法的结果精度和收敛速度。经过 理论分析和仿真对比发现，本算法具有更小的复杂度和更高的准确性, 能够大幅度提高的预衰落合成法的信道重构效率。
其次，预衰落合成法的目的是在测试区域内部精确复现目标信道 的空间相关性。在以往文献中，通常从统计平均的角度进行测试区域 内部空间相关性的推导。然而在实际的测试中，由于信道模拟器中的 每一个随机参数都是提前设置好的，信道模拟器生成的信道时间序列 固定不变。因此，文献中基于统计平均的假设不成立，导致测试区域 内部合成的空间相关性存在误差。本文首先基于时间平均的角度对目 标信道和OTA信道的空时联合相关性进行公式推导和理论分析。公 式推导结果显示，空时联合相关性是由信道模型中子径的初始相位决 定的。基于此，本文提出了一种基于离散傅里叶变换矩阵的信道改进 方法，能够消除传统预衰落合成法中空间相关性合成误差的问题。该 方法的主要思想是利用了离散傅里叶变换矩阵的正交性，将矩阵中各 个列向量作为信道模型中子径的初始相位。仿真结果表明，相较于传 统预衰落合成法，该方法能够大幅提升信道重构的精度。
关键词:空口测试;暗室多探头法;预衰落合成法;信道重构
RESEARCH ON EFFICIENT CHANNEL RESCONSTRUCTION ALFORITHMS BASED ON PREFADED SIGNAL SYNTHESIS METHOD
ABSTRACT
In recent years, with the vigorous promotion of 5G commercialization, the market share of 5G massive multiple input multiple output (MIMO) device has gradually increased. Meanwhile, massive MIMO technology poses new challenges to the testing of 5G equipment, which further restricts the promotion and mass production of 5G equipment. Thus, multi-probe anechoic chamber (MPAC), as the MIMO device testing method which can theoretically reproduce any channel models, has become the focus of research in the industry. The main idea of prefaded signal synthesis (PFS), which is known as the significiant channel reconstruction method in MPAC, is to use limited number of probes to reproduce the disired spatial profiles within test area. However, due to the new characteristics of 5G MIMO devices, there are serveral challenges in the channel reconstruction of PFS method. Thus, in this paper, the PFS method is studied from the perspective of efficiency and accuracy.
Firstly, one of the significant challenges of MPAC is the system cost reduction. Each probe in the testing system needs to connect with the expensive channel emulator (CE) port, whereas a large number of probes will increase the system cost greatly. Thus, the probe selection process is needed to reduce the number of probes in the testing system. However, in 5G MIMO OTA testing, due to the increase of candicate probes, the computation complexity of probe selection algorithm increases greatly, which seriously affects the efficiency of channel reconstruction of PFS method. This paper proposes an effective probe selection algorithm, which can effectively decrease the computation complexity compared with the mainstream convex algorithms. The main idea of proposed algorithm is to compute the gradient of objective function, and then adopt the momentum gradient descent method to optimize the probe weights. In order to select desired probes during iteration, the regularization function is added into the objective function. By dynamically adjusting the parameters in the iteration process, the accuracy and convergence speed of the algorithm are guaranteed. Through the theory analysis and simulation comparsion, it is found that the proposed algorithm has less complexity and higher accuracy, and can greatly improve the efficiency of channel reconstruction for PFS method.
Secondly, the purpose of the PFSmethod is to accurately reproduce the spatial correlation of the target channel within the test area. In the previous literature, the deviation of spatial correlation within the test area is based on ensemble-averaging. However, in practical OTA testing, since every random parameter in the channel emulator is preconfigured, the channel time response generated by the channel emulator is deterministic. Therefore, the hypothesis based on ensemble-averaging in the prevoius literature is not valid, resulting in errors in the simulated spatial correlation within the test area. In this paper, the space-time joint correlation function (STCF) of the target channel and OTA channel is derived and analyzed theoretically from the new perspective of time-averaging. The derivation results show that the STCF is determined by the initial phase of subpath in the channel model. According to the theoretical derivation results, an improved channel moodelling method based on discrete Fourier transform (DFT) matrix is proposed in this paper, which can eliminate the error of spatial correlation synthesis in the traditional PFS method. The main idea of proposed method is to use the orthogonality of DFT matrix and take each column vector in the matrix as the initial phase of subpath in the channel model. Simulation results show that the proposed method can greatly improve the accuracy of channel reconstruction.
KEY WORDS:OTA testing;MPAC;PFS;channel reconstruction
