摘要
为满足人们日益增长的无线通信需求，第五代移动通信(the Fifth Generatkm, 5G)系统引入诸多新技术提升信息传输能力。然而，由 于无线信道的开放性，无线通信面临欺骗、窃听、干扰等广泛的攻击 威胁。无人机(Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, UAV)通信场景、智能反 射面(Intelligentreflecting surface, IRS)等新技术的使用进一步加剧 了无线安全风险。物理层安全是保障无线通信安全的重要手段，可从 底层入手直接有效地解决无线欺骗与窃听问题，近年来备受关注。基 于物理层安全理论，有望利用无线新技术自身解决其潜在的安全问题。 本文针对非法通信、无线欺骗、无线窃听等典型无线安全问题，研究 相应的物理层安全解决方法，分别阐述如下：
1•协作通信中基于空间调制的无线欺骗方法研究
针对无线网络中的非法通信问题，提出一种基于协作空间调制思 想的三维符号级欺骗方法，可实现对非法通信内容的伪造或篡改；基 于概率理论和最大似然判决准则，推导了欺骗成功率的闭合表达式， 描述了欺骗节点传输功率、天线数、调制阶数等关键参数对欺骗性能 的影响；仿真分析发现，与随机欺骗方法和传统二维星座符号级欺骗 方法对比，所提方案具有更高的欺骗成功概率，当欺骗节点传输功率 为10~1AW时，欺骗成功率可高达90%,提升60%以上。
2. UAV通信中基于RSS多点检测的抗欺骗方法研究
针对伪地面基站节点(Malicious Attacker, MA)欺骗UAV的问 题，利用UAV飞行轨迹的确定性和相邻位置之间信道属性的关联性， 提出一种基于接收信号强度(Received Signal Strength, RSS)的多点联 合检测方法；基于概率理论，分析了所提方法的漏检率和虚警率；仿 真发现，MA距离合法地面基站6.5米时，所提方案的漏检率可低于 0.1%,比传统多点独立检测方法降低70%以上，可有效检测近距离攻 击节点。
3.IRS辅助的OFDM系统抗窃听方法研究
针对无线通信系统中的无线窃听问题，提出一种IRS辅助的正交 频分复用(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing, OFDM)系统 抗窃听方法；基于经典优化理论，利用块坐标下降法，对IRS相移、 子载波分配和功率分配进行联合设计，提出一种元素级块坐标下降算法，最大化OFDM系统安全容量。仿真发现，与IRS相移随机配置 方案相比，当IRS相移器数量为12,子载波数量为8,传输功率为 8W时，所提方案可将安全容量提升3倍以上，并且IRS相移器数量 越多，提升的效果越好。
关键词:空间调制;无人机;接收信号强度;智能反射面;正交频分复用技术
Research on Physical Layer Security Technology for Wireless Deception and Wireless Eavesdropping
ABSTRACT
In order to meet people's increasing demand for wireless communication, the fifth generation(5G) mobile communication system introduces many new technologies to improve information transmission capabilities. However, due to the openness of wireless channel, wireless communication faces a wide range of threats such as spoofing, eavesdropping, and interference. In addition, the use of new wireless technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communication and intelligent reflecting surface (IRS) has further exacerbated the security risks of wireless network. Physical layer security is an important measure to ensure wireless communication security. It can directly and effectively solve wireless spoofing and eavesdropping from the bottom layer, and it's an important issues that has attracted much attention in recent years. Based on the theory of physical layer security, it is expected that new wireless technologies can be used to solve their potential security problems. Therefore, this paper focuses on typical wireless security problems such as illegal communication, wireless spoofing, wireless eavesdropping, etc., and studies the corresponding physical layer security solutions, respectively, as follows:
1. Research on wireless spoofing methods based on spatial modulation in cooperative communication
Aiming at the problem of illegal communication in wireless networks,
a three-dimensional symbol-level spoofing method based on the idea of
cooperative spatial modulation is proposed, which can fake or tamper
illegal communication content. Based on probability theory and maximum
likelihood judgment criteria, the closed expression of the spoofing symbol
success rate is derived. The expression describes the impact of key
HI
parameters such as the transmit power of spoofing node, number of antennas, and symbol modulation order on spoofing performance. Simulation analysis finds that compared with random spoofing method and constellation two-dimensional symbol-level spoofing method, the proposed method has a higher spoofing symbol success rate. When the transmit power of the spoofing node is 10~1AW, the spoofing success rate can be as high as 90%, increase more than 60%.
2. Research on Anti-Spoofing Method Based on RSS Multipoint Detection in UAV Communication
Aiming at the problem of the pseudo ground base station node (Malicious Attacker, MA) spoofing UAV in the UAV communication network, using the certainty of the UAV flight trajectory and the correlation of the channel attributes between adjacent positions, a method for multi-point joint detection of MA based on Received Signal Strength (RSS) is proposed. Based on probability theory, the false alarm rate and missed detection rate of the proposed method are analyzed. Simulation finds that when the MA is 6.5 meters away from the legal ground base station, the missed detection rate of the proposed scheme can be less than 0.1%, which is more than 70% lower than the traditional multi-point independent detection method, and it can effectively detect short-range attack nodes.
3. Research on IRS-Assisted OFDM Systems Anti-Eavesdropping Method
Aiming at the problem of wireless eavesdropping in wireless communication systems, an IRS-enhanced Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) systems anti-eavesdropping method is proposed. Based on the classical optimization theory, using the method of block coordinate descent, the phase shift of IRS, sub-carrier allocation and power allocation are jointly designed, and an element-level block coordinate descent algorithm is proposed to maximize the security capacity of OFDM systems. The simulation finds that compared with the random configuration scheme of IRS phase shift, when the number of IRS phase shifters is 10, the number of subcarriers is & and the transmit power is 8W, the proposed scheme can increase the security capacity more than three times, and the more the number of IRS phase shifters, the better the security capacity improved.
KEY WORDS: spatial modulation;unmanned aerial vehicle;received signal strength;intelligent reflecting surface;orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
