摘要
随着云计算以及5G技术的不断发展和推进,网络规模日益扩大， 为了适应用户多样化的业务需求，异构化和虚拟化成为未来网络的发 展趋势。异构网络由多种网络堆叠组成，其中每个转发节点都拥有多 种通信接口，节点之间通过同种网络接口或者跨网协作进行通信。在 这种接入环境复杂的异构网络中进行资源分配和虚拟化将十分困难。 借鉴软件定义网络(SoftwareDe五nedNetwork, SDN)的控制转发分 离的思想，物理网络通过集中式控制器收集转发设备信息，并将各种 异构网络资源抽象为资源池进行统一管理。当用户通过虚拟网络建立 请求申请资源时，控制器通过虚拟网络映射算法将虚拟节点和链路映 射到部分物理节点和链路上，从而为该请求分配物理资源。在异构网 络中，如果资源映射不合理，一方面不能充分发挥异构网络链路资源 丰富的优势，另一方面频繁进行跨网通信反而可能导致网络整体性能 下降。因此，论文针对异构SDN网络场景中虚拟网络映射算法进行 研究，旨在实现高效合理的网络资源分配及虚拟化方案。
首先，论文基于现有虚拟网络映射问题模型，提出了一种基于链 路剩余带宽的启发式在线网络映射算法。在异构网络中，节点进行跨 网协作通信时，中间转发节点会引入协议转换开销。论文首先针对传 统映射模型对异构网络切换考虑不足的问题，定义了异构网络切换代 价，然后将其引入物理资源开销模型中，并且以最小化物理网络开销 作为算法优化目标，使得算法计算出的映射方案物理资源消耗更少。 同时，针对传统链路映射方案中对直连节点间多链路考虑不足的问题, 论文将路径松弛算法引入链路映射方案选优中。仿真结果表明，相较 于目前已有的 VNE-G-SP、VNE-R-ViNE-SP 和 VNE-G-LMAoKS 算 法，论文提岀的算法能够提高虚拟网络请求成功率，提高网络资源利 用率，减少物理网络消耗的资源。
其次，论文针对同时具有时延和带宽约束的多QoS需求的虚拟 网络建立请求，提岀了~种基于蚁群算法改进的带宽时延感知的虚拟 网络在线映射算法。论文针对现有蚁群优化映射算法在蚂蚁随机搜索 中对异构网络切换考虑不足的问题，通过将剩余带宽资源和异构切换 代价引入启发函数和信息素模型中，使得蚁群在搜索过程中更倾向于 寻找剩余资源丰富的同构链路。同时针对蚁群映射算法在链路映射过 程中没有利用信息素的问题，论文引入同阶段映射中增广图的概念, 使得链路映射过程可以充分利用每条异构物理链路上存储的信息素, 从而可以更容易逼近最优解。仿真结果表明，相较于VNE-Greedy和 VNE-AC算法，论文提出的算法能够提高虚拟网络请求成功率，优化 蚁群搜索方案，提高网络资源利用率，减少物理网络资源支出。
最后，论文对全文研究工作内容进行总结，并对下一步研究工作 进行展望。
关键词：异构SDN网络;网络虚拟化;虚拟网络映射;异构切换;蚁群优化算法
RESEARCH ON VIRTUAL NETWORK MAPPING FOR HETEROGENEOUS SOFTWARE-DEFINED NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
With the continuous development and advancement of cloud computing and 5G technology, the scale of the network continues to expand. In order to adapt to the business needs of users, heterogeneous and virtualization have become the development trend of future networks. The heterogeneous network consists of multiple different types of networks, each of which has different network characteristics. Resource allocation and virtualization in this complicated access environment will be very difficult. However, Software-defined networking brings new ideas for providing virtual network services on heterogeneous networks. The physical network collects device information through the controller and abstracts it as physical network resources for maintenance and management. When a virtual network request comes, it is mapped to part of the physical network through a virtual network mapping algorithm to meet business needs. In such a heterogeneous environment, if network resources cannot be properly configured, the resources of heterogeneous will be wasted, even worst, the overall performance of the network may be reduced due to heterogeneous network switching. Therefore, the thesis focuses on the virtual network mapping algorithm in the heterogeneous SDN scenario, aiming to realize an efficient and reasonable network resource allocation and virtualization scheme.
Firstly, based on the existing virtual network mapping problem model, the thesis proposes a heuristic online network mapping algorithm that considers the remaining bandwidth of the link. In a heterogeneous network, when inter-network cooperative communication is performed between adjacent links, intemiediate forwarding nodes will introduce protocol conversion overhead. The thesis first defines the cost of heterogeneous network switching in view of the traditional mapping model's insufficient consideration of heterogeneous network switching, and then introduces it into the physical resource expenditure model, and minimizes the physical network expenditure as the algorithm optimization goal. The physical resource consumption of the mapping scheme evaluated by the algorithm is more in line with the actual heterogeneous network model. At the same time, in view of the problem that the traditional link mapping scheme does not consider the multiple links between adjacent nodes, the thesis proposes a path relaxation algorithm, so that the algorithm can select the best link among multiple links. The simulation results show that compared with the existing VNE-G-SP, VNE-R-ViNE-SP and VNE-G-LMAoKS algorithms, the algorithm proposed in the thesis can improve the success rate of virtual network requests, reduce the resources allocated by the physical network, and improve the utilization of network resources.
Secondly, the thesis proposes a virtual network online mapping algorithm based on ant colony algoritlim improved bandwidth and delay awareness for the virtual network establisliment request with multiple QoS requirements with both delay and bandwidth constraints. Aiming at the problem that the existing ant colony mapping algorithm is not suitable for heterogeneous networks in the ant random search process, the thesis introduces the remaining bandwidth resources and the heterogeneous switching cost into the definition of the heuristic function and pheromone model, so that the ants are more inclined to look for homogeneous links with abundant remaining resources. At the same time, the concept of expand graph in the same-stage mapping is introduced, so that each heterogeneous physical link can store pheromone, which makes it easier to approach the optimal solution. The simulation results show that compared with the VNE-Greedy and VNE-AC algorithms, the algorithm proposed in the thesis can improve the success rate of virtual network requests, optimize the ant colony search scheme, reduce physical network resource expenditures, and improve network resource utilization.
Finally, the thesis summarizes all the work, discusses the research points that still need to be improved and looks forward to the next research work.
KEY WORDS:heterogeneous software defined networks;network virtualization;virtual network mapping;network switching;ant colony optimization
