摘要
近年来随着Google、苹果等公司对室内定位技术投入越来越多 的关注和支持，国内外各领域对室内定位技术的研究再一次掀起了新 的高潮。位置信息主要应用于基于移动端的LBS(Location Based Services)服务中，例如大型商贸城的推送业务，医院的导航，机场循 迹，在大型娱乐场所或博物馆向游客提供当前的位置信息和相应设施 资料等。众所周知，由于GPS定位的发展，室外环境中的定位服务 已满足人们的需求，然而，室内环境下的位置服务仍需要进一步的提 升，特别是在精度、可靠性、实时性等方面。
论文正是此背景下，•首先对现阶段的室内定位系统进行了概括性 的论述和比较，分析并讨论了 GPS卫星定位系统、红外定位系统、 射频识别定位系统、超宽带定位系统、蓝牙定位系统和WLAN室内 定位系统的成本、定位精度、可靠性及使用条件限制，给出WLAN 系统的优缺点。其次对基于WLAN室内定位的三大类主要算法做出 例举，并凸显基于模式识别算法的位置指纹法的优势，就位置指纹法 中使用的一系列算法，主要有K近邻算法、决策树算法、朴素贝叶 斯算法、支持向量机算法等，对精度、成本预估和模型训练预测时间 做出仿真。
本文将提升算法(Boosting Algorithm)引入传统的指纹定位算法 中，根据启发式的原理，将原本分类效果较差的决策树模型提升为分 类效果很好的强分类器，同时保留了决策^•算法预测时间短的优势。 此外，本文还在实际定位阶段引入了特征选择算法，不仅降低了模型 的复杂度，缩短了模型训练的时间，同时增强了定位模型的泛化能力 和容错能力。特别地，将提升算法与特征选择算法相结合后，不但定 位精度得以改善，训练时间也相对缩短，定位实时性也得到提高。
关键字：WLAN室内定位 机器学习特征选择RSS
FEATURE SELECTION AND
APPLICATION BASED ON WLAN
INDOOR POSITIONING SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
Recently as many corporations like Google and Apple gradually pay attention to indoor positioning techniques, study on indoor positioning algorithms is lifted new upsurge. Location information is mainly used in Location Based Services especially based on mobile devices. LBS has been widely used in information delivering in big shopping mall, navigation in hospital, location navigation in airport, indoor positioning in large museums and entertainment venues. It is well known that with the development of GPS positioning method, outdoor positioning services has met the demands of people. However, location services based on indoor circumstance needs to be improved, especially in accuracy, reliability, real-time positioning ability and so on.
Against this background, this paper firstly makes a generally discussion and comparison among indoor positioning systems at stage, such as GPS positioning system, Infrared positioning system, Radio Frequency Identification positioning system, Ultra-wideband positioning system, Bluetooth positioning system and WLAN positioning system and so on. This paper pays attentionto many aspects, especially in terms of positioning accuracy, reliability, real-time positioning ability and limitations. And then summarize the advantages and disadvantages of WLAN indoor positioning systems. After that, this paper gives some examples of the main three categories of positioning algorithms at present, highlight the superiority of fingerprinting methods, and introduce machine learning algorithms within fingerprinting indoor positioning area at the same time.
hi
Specially, an adaptive boosting algorithm, also called AdaBoost which is a combination of a series of weak classifiers like decision trees according to heuristic principles, is introduced in the traditional fingerprinting algorithms. AdaBoost is a classifier that not only has a fast real-time location capability, but also performs well with respect to location accuracy. Besides, feature selection algorithms also play an important role in indoor positioning in practice. According to the simulation in school building, feature selection could help to reduce model complexity, shorten model training cycle, while enhancing the prediction ability and fault tolerance of a model. In particular, with the combination of boosting algorithm and feature selection algorithms, indoor positioning accuracy will be enhanced, model training period will be shorten and real-time location ability will be improved.
KEY WORDS: WLAN indoor positioning machine learning feature selection RSS
