摘要
随着无线通信技术的飞速发展，人们对无线通信业务的需求也在 不断增长。为了满足业务的需求，就需要不断地增加基础设施建设, 但同时又会增加能源消耗和维护成本。由于无线移动网络的流动特性 会导致业务需求量随着人口的流动而分布不均和变化，因此会出现业 务量高的局部区域处理性能下降，业务量低的区域计算资源利用率很 低的问题。而且这种局部计算资源紧张，整体计算资源充足的问题仅 仅依靠增加基站建设是无法完全解决的。
资源虚拟化技术正是为了解决上述问题而提出来的，而信号处理 的动态迁移正是资源虚拟化技术中的核心环节。本文正是针对信号处 理，特别是通信中的实时信号处理的动态迁移技术进行研究。在现有 的虚拟化技术和相应的动态迁移技术研究的基础上，提岀了利用软件 无线电平台来设计实现能够满足通信数据业务高实时性要求的实时 信号处理的动态迁移系统，并将该系统应用到通信中继传输业务中。
本文主要从以下儿个方面进行了研究和创新：第一，为了保证数 据在动态迁移过程中的连续性，本文提出了数据流动态迁移技术。基 于软件无线电平台，对数据流处理部分的不同模块进行封装与优化， 特别是在数据流切换的过程中避免耗时模块的调用，从而缩短整个迁 移的时间花费。第二，提出了控制信息流动态迁移技术。该技术实现 了实时信号处理任务中短期内不发生变化的控制信息和系统信息向 目的端的迁移，以促使目的端系统能够尽快恢复起迁移前的业务处理。 减少了迁移过程中业务中断时间。第三，设计实现了具有高实时性的 实时信号处理动态迁移方案。该方案对整个动态迁移处理流程进行了 详细的设计，并提出了信号处理任务动态迁移技术。同时结合数据流 动态迁移和控制信息流动态迁移技术共同实现了动态迁移系统。通过 与传统的迁移技术进行比较与分析，得出了该技术方案在性能方面的 显著优势。第四，本文基于实时信号处理动态迁移技术设计了中继处 理业务的动态迁移系统方案。实现了对视频中继传输业务的动态迁移, 并对中继处理业务迁移过程的性能进行了分析与验证。
关键词：动态迁移；虚拟化；软件无线电；实时信号处理
DYNAMIC MIGRATION TECHNOLOGY OF
REAL-TIME SIGNAL PROCESSING BASED
ON SDR
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of wireless communication technology, the demand for wireless communication services is also growing. To meet the needs of the business, we have to continue to increase infrastructure. But energy consumption and maintenance costs will also increase at the same time. The flow characteristics of wireless mobile networks will lead to the uneven distribution and change of business needs with the flow of population. Therefore there is such a problem that processing performance declines in the localized area of high traffic processing and computing resource utilization efficiency is very low in the localized area of low traffic processing. The problem that the local computing resources are very tight and the overall computing resources are sufficient cannot be fully resolved only by increasing infrastructure.
Resource virtualization technology is proposed in order to solve the above problem. And the dynamic migration of signal processing is the core part of virtualization technology. This paper is to study the dynamic migration technology for signal processing, especially for communication real-time signal processing. On the basis of existing virtualization technologies and corresponding dynamic migration, this paper proposed to utilize software defined radio platform to design and implement a new dynamic migration system. The system could meet the high real-time requirement of communication data services. And finally the system is applied to communication relay transmission service.
This paper mainly study and innovate in the following aspects. First, in order to ensure business data continuity during the dynamic migration, this paper proposed a data streaming dynamic migration technology. The technology encapsulates and optimizes different data stream processing module based on software radio platform. In particular, the consuming module will avoid being called in the data stream switching. Thus the overall time of migration will be shortened. Second, this paper proposed the dynamic migration technology of the control information stream. The technology achieves the control infbnnation of real-time signal processing tasks and system information that do not change in the short term to migrate to the destination. It will promote the business process before to be restored in the destination system as soon as possible and thereby reduce the service interruption time in migration. Third, this paper designed and implemented the real-time signal processing dynamic migration scheme with high real-time. The scheme carried out a detailed design for the entire dynamic migration process and proposed a dynamic migration technology of signal processing tasks. The technology combines dynamic migration technology of data stream and control information stream together to achieve a dynamic migration system. Compared to traditional migration technology, the scheme proposed by this paper obtained a significant advantage in terms of performance. Finally, this paper also designed dynamic migration system solution of relay processing business based on real-time signal processing dynamic migration system previously mentioned. The system achieved the dynamic migration of video relay transmission services. And then the migration performance of relay processing service is analyzed and verified.
KEY WORDS: dynamic migration; virtualization; software defined radio; real-time signal processing
