摘要
二十一世纪最重要的特征之一是在计算机网络基础上的人类社 会各领域的信息化，信息科技领域的各种新理论、新技术竞相出现。 信息的自由、高效流动，万物的高效互联为经济、社会的高速、高效、 健康发展提供了巨大的支持和保障。人民的生活、工作、学习也大受 裨益。然而，伴随着信息网络的快速发展，与网络信息技术相关的风 险及问题也逐渐凸显，甚至日益尖锐。
一方面，网络的使用过程中，尤其是科研、办公类的专用网络中 经常出现有意或无意的不合权限的网络使用行为，如使用违规软件， 进行许可之外的其他活动等；另一方面，信息计算机网络中还存在着 对受限信息恶意窃取甚至于破坏的现象。在整个网络系统层次，当前 各组织、机构对计算机网络有极高的依赖。因此，要求信息网络必须 供高效、可靠的服务。对网络进行实时检测以及定期进行日志的分析， 从而为网络的维护提供依据，也显得尤为重要。在这种情况下，不断 将新的网络应用审计技术引入到计算机网络审计系统中就变的十分 必要。
本文在对当前网络应用内容审计技术进行了大量研究、分析的基 础上，对网络审计中的关键技术进行了创新、优化。本文首先提出了 一种对计算机网络中终端数量、状况检测的技术，这为进一步对网络 应用内容的审计技术提供了网络结构基础。使得网络应用内容审计的 结果可以对应到具体的网络终端之上，从而提高了网络内容审计结果 的准确度和可用性。紧接着，本文研究了针对HTTP的网络内容审计 信息的发现、提取技术。对HTTP相关网络内容审计信息的发现、提 取研究分为两个大的部分，第一部分对HTML文档即Web页面进行 结构分析，研究其中信息元素的分布，并根据该分析，从总体、细节 两个层次设计方法对信息元素进行提取；第二个部分对网络HTTP报 文所包含的可用于网络内容审计的信息进行研究，并设计方法提取。 最后，针对当前网络结构复杂，内容信息庞杂的现实，将分布式大数
据处理技术弓I入到网络应用内容的审计之中。将传统经典的数据分析、 挖掘算法与创新数据处理技术相结合，较大程度上提高了网络内容审 计的效率及准确性，为网络应用内容审计展现了一个新的思路和方向。
关键词:HTTP;应用内容审计;HTML文档;元素提取;并行计算


RESEARCH AND IMPLEMENTATION OF NETWORK
APPLICATION CONTENT AUDIT KEY TECHNIQUES
CONCERNING HTTP
ABSTRACT
One of the most important features of the Twenty-First Century is informatization and networking. New technologies and capabilities keep emerging in Information Technology field. Free and rapid flow of information, interconnection of everything provides great support and protection fbr the high-speed, efficient and healthy development of national economy. Every aspect of people's life is also benefited. Whereas, with the rapid development of computer information networks, network technology-related risks and issues are becoming increasingly prominent, even more acute.
On the one hand, the application of computer network, especially private network that used in research field or fbr office purpose being intentionally or unintentionally abused from time to time, Such as using illegal software, carry on activities without permitted, etc. On the other hand, confidential information theft, even malicious damage still exists within computer information network. Currently, on the network system level, organizations and institutions use computer network in such a depth, that network must supply efficient and reliable information service, so real-time detection and analysis of network status logs regularly to provide the basis fbr network maintenance is particularly important. As a matter of fact, the introducing of network audit system, constantly improving network audit applications become extremely necessary.
In this thesis, a large amount of network application contents audit key technology innovation, optimization having been put forward, with a lot of research under new technical conditions basis. This thesis presents a of computer network terminal number and state detection technology, to further the audit of network application contents technique provides the basis for making the results of tiie network audit may correspond to the specific network terminal, thereby improving the network the accuracy and availability of audit results. And then, this thesis proposes a network audit information discovery and extraction technology concerning HTTP, which consists of two sections. The first section is an HTML document or Web page audit infbnnation element research, and implement information element extraction from two designate levels. The second section is research of HTTP packet infbnnation extraction which can be used fbr network auditing. Finally, distributed data processing technology is introduced to cope with the current complex, heterogeneous network situation. The integrated use of classical data mining algorithms analysis and updated data processing technology improves the efficiency and accuracy of Web content audit greatly, provided new prospect and direction fbr network content audit.


KEY WORDS:http;application content audit;HTML document;element extraction;parallel computing
