摘要
近些年来，双向中继系统以其在提高频谱效率方面的优势受到了研 究者们的广泛关注，并已经应用于如Ad-hoc网络，蜂窝网络等多种场 景中。然而，在现有的研究中，对于中继传输系统中的用户调度方案设 计并不多见。为了能够更全面分析双向中继系统的特性，提高系统的传 输性能，本文研究了不同场景下的用户调度算法，并对系统性能进行了 分析。
本文的主要创新和贡献如下：
1）	在多用户双向中继场景下，当用户和中继配备的天线数量满足特 定条件时，应用传统的信号空间对齐技术能够有效提高系统的自由度。 然而，当特定条件不满足时，空间维度不能再支持信号空间对齐，此时 系统的自由度会大大降低。针对此问题，本文提出了一种新的机会信号 空间对齐方案，该方案基于奇异值分解技术实现，同时联合波束成型方 案和用户选择技术，通过引入多用户分集技术完成机会信号空间对齐。 最后，通过仿真实验验证了所提方案与传统方案相比，在和速率上得到 一定程度的提高。
2）	在多用户的双向中继系统中，为了提高系统的分集增益，研究者 们引入用户调度算法，然而在提高系统性能的同时也提高了实现的复杂 度。为了最大限度的降低系统复杂度，提出了一种基于信道系数模值的 低复杂度用户调度方案。虽然该方案在复杂度上有明显优势，但是系统 性能却不是很理想，所以，本文提出了一种基于信道模值与信道正交性 的调度方案，该方案能达到的系统性能近似于最优调度方案，但是中继 需要掌握全局信道状态信息并进行集中运算。值得注意的是，该方案能 够保证在较低的复杂度条件下，达到接近最优调度方案的系统性能。但 是，虽然该方案性能上有较大优势，复杂度却相对较高，因而，本文进
一步提出了一种分步调度方案。这种分步调度方案设定一个固定的阈值 来平衡复杂度/CSI和系统性能，该方案显著改善了中继的CSI开销和运 算复杂度，在系统性能上略差于最优方案。
3）在无线信息与能量传输系统，为了有效利用能源，引入了能量收 集技术。本文主要设计了一种能够使系统在长时间内达到平均最大容量 的中继调度方案，同时保证中继消耗较少的能量。在该场景下，中继所 需能量也需要考虑在内。通过运用数学工具，将目标函数转化为凸优化 问题，进而得出最优解。该方案虽然在性能上具有较高的优越性，但是 复杂度却很高，为了减少运算的复杂度，本文还提出了一种低复杂度的 次优方案。本文提出的最优算法最大化了系统的平均和速率，同时尽可 能的减少从中继中收集的能量，达到了和速率和收集能量大小的折中。 最后，在仿真结果中给出了系统能量性能和信息传输性能间的折中关系, 验证了所提算法的有效性。
关键词:双向中继系统;用户调度;干扰对齐;低复杂度
LOW COMPLEXITY USER SCHEDULING SCHEMES IN TWO-WAY RELAY SYSTEMS

ABSTRACT
Recently, two-way relay network has attracted much attention because it has been suggested to improve the spectral efficiency, and it has been applied in a variety of fields such as ad-hoc networks and cellular. However, the research on user scheduling schemes in two-way relay network is not much. In order to figure out how the user scheduling algorithms benefit the two-way relay system, some user scheduling schemes are studied in this paper, and the system perfoamance is analyzied in multiple scenes.
The main innovations and contributions of the paper are as follows.
1)we develop a new scheme called opportunistic signal space alignment which combines beam-forming design with user selection based on singular value decomposition . Opportunistic alignment is realized by taking take advantage of multi-user diversity. Then, its performance is analyzed in terms of user scaling law required to achieve the degrees of freedom ofN per channel use when the number of user pairs grow faster than the system signal ratio. Extensive simulations are conducted, and the results show that the proposed scheme provides significant improvement in terms of sum rates.
2)we consider low-complexity user scheduling schemes fbr the multi-pair two-way relay channel, where L pairs of single antenna users are selected from K pairs to perform pair-wise information exchange via an Nr -antenna amplify- and-fbrward relay (Nr > 2L — 1 ) with analogue network coding . We first propose a simple channel norm (CN) based scheme, which enables low-complexity implementation. Then, we propose a user scheduling by jointly considering the pair-wise channels norms and orthogonality among all the users(CNO-A), which requires global channel state information (CSI) and centralized computation at the relay. It is noted that CNO-A scheme can achieve comparable perfbrmance as the optimal scheduling with reduced computational complexity. Finally, we propose a two-step selective CNO scheme (CNO-S), which strikes a flexible balance between complexity/CSI overhead and performance. CNO-S significantly reduces CSI overhead and computational complexity at the relay, while achieving comparable performance as the CNO-A scheme. Numerical results and complexity analysis not only show that the proposed schemes are feasible and effective, but also demonstrate their advantages over the existing schemes.
3)a source-destination pair nodes communicate with each other via a relay selected from the candidate relays, while the rest of the relays harvest energy in each time slot. The aim of this paper is to design an optimal relay scheduling scheme that maximizes the long term average system throughput subjecting to a minimum required average harvested energy. Through some mathematical operations, the original problem can be translated into a convex optimization problem. In order to reduce the computation complexity, a low-complexity suboptimal with partial optimal scheme is proposed. The proposed optimization algorithm maximizes the average sum-rate of the system while harvests energy from the relays as much as possible. Numerical simulation results corroborate the conjecture and provide insight on the theoretical findings.

KEY WORDS:TWR;user scheduling;IA;low-complexity


