摘要
近年来随着互联网的飞速发展，人们对网络性能的要求也不断增 加，传统的集中式移动性管理制约了网络性能的提高，IP网络架构 逐渐向扁平化发展。分布式移动性管理(Distributed Mobility Management, DMM)将移动锚点分布式地部署使其更接近移动节点， 缓解了集中锚点的管控压力。但DMM方案中切换时延较长、转发路径 非最优、以及隧道开销等问题对实时性要求较高的业务依然有很大的 影响。
论文介绍了移动性管理的研究现状，分析了 DMM方案存在的切换 时延较长、隧道开销等问题。提出了一个面向DMM的切换优化方法 (VDMM)。在VDMM方法中，当用户接入网络时，通过虚拟化技术在 物理AP上为用户虚拟出唯一的虚拟AP,虚拟AP拥有链路层和网络 层中连接建立所需的相关状态信息。当用户即将切换到新的网络时， 将用户的虚拟AP随之切换，则用户切换后能够迅速与新的网络建立 连接，缩短了用户重新建立连接的时间，减少了 DMM方案的切换时延; 论文针对DMM切换过程中的流量优化问题，进一步提出了一种自适应 负载均衡算法(ALB),算法同时考虑了信号强度和AP负载，将用户 从高负载AP迁移到负载较低信号强度合适的AP上，实现了网络中 AP的负载均衡。论文基于Docker平台开发了 VDMM方法的主要功能, 并通过仿真试验验证了上述方法的性能。
关键词:分布式移动性管理;虚拟化;负载均衡
OPTIMIZATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF DISTRIBUTED MOBILITY MANAGEMENT HANDOVER MECHANISM

ABSTRACT
In recent years, with the rapid development of the Internet, people's requirements for network perfonnance are also increasing, and the IP network architecture gradually develops toward flat architecture. The distributed deployment of mobile anchors in the Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) solution addresses the issue of single point of failure and triangular routing in a centralized mobility management solution. However, the switching delay in the DMM scheme is longer, the forwarding path is not optimal, and the problem such as the tunnel cost still has a great impact on the real-time demanding services.
This paper introduces the cun-ent research status of mobility management, analyzes the problems such as long switching delay, non-optimal forwarding path and tunnel overhead in the DMM scheme. A DMM-based handover optimization method is proposed(VDMM). In this method, when a user accesses the network, it virtualizes a unique virtual AP for the user on the physical AP thi'ough virtualization technology. The virtual AP has the relevant state information required for establishing the connection in the link layer and the network layer.When the user is about to switch to a new network, the user's virtual AP will be switched,and the user can quickly establish a connection with a new network after handoff, which reduces the time fbr the user to reestablish the connection and reduces the handoff delay.This paper proposes an adaptive load balancing algorithm(ALB) fbr traffic optimization in DMM handover process. The algorithm considers both signal strength and AP load. It migrates users fi*om high load APs to APs with lower signal strengths. The AP load
balancing in the network is achieved. The paper developed the main functions of VDMM based on Docker platform, and verified the performance of the above methods through simulation experiments.
KEY WORDS:Distributed Mobility Management;Virtualization;Load Balance

