摘要
随着计算机技术与移动互联网技术的蓬勃发展，我们己经进入大 数据时代。Hadoop作为一种先进的大数据处理工具，凭借简单的并 行编程模型、庞大的数据存储能力和高效的计算能力提供了良好的用 户体验，成为大多数企业和科学研究的首选。基于Hadoop的网络大 规模流量分析系统用于存储海量网络流量数据，并运行离线应用程序 对数据进行研究分析。分析系统的性能状态直接决定应用程序的工作 效率，如何有效准确地分析评估分析系统的性能状态，成为能否有效 指导用户行为、提升分析系统性能的关键。
本文首先介绍了 Hadoop的基本概念，对Hadoop集群性能状态 的主要影响因素和研究现状进行了概述。然后，结合分析系统的实际 情况，提出一套性能状态分析与评估的方案。接着，阐述了选取三个 标准应用程序的运行时间作为性能状态的评估标准的原因，并介绍所 选性能数据指标和基于Flume的性能数据釆集系统。其次，依次介绍 线性的多元线性回归和非线性的BP神经网络两种建模方式的基本内 容，通过二者分别对评估标准和性能数据建模分析。最后，以验证可 用模型对分析系统的性能状态进行分析与评估，比较两种建模方式的 优劣，指导用户的使用行为，进行系统的性能优化，验证方案的可行 性与有效性。
关键词:性能评估;Hadoop;多元线性回归;BP神经网络;时间预测
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND EVALUATION OF LARGE-SCALE NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS SYSTEM BASED ON HADOOP

ABSTRACT
With the booming of computer technology and the mobile Internet technology, we have entered the era of big data. As an advanced big data processing tool, Hadoop provides an excellent user experience with simple parallel programming model, large data storage capacity and efficient computing capability, therefore it has become the first choice fbr most enterprises and scientific research. Hadoop-based large-scale network traffic analysis system stores massive network traffic data and runs off-line analysis applications over these data. The efficiency of applications is directly determined by the performance of analysis system. Thus, how to effectively and accurately analyze and evaluate the performance of analysis system has become the significant key to effectively guide the user behavior and improve performance.
In this thesis, firstly we introduce the basic knowledge ofHadoop, and give an overview of main influence factors and recent research results of Hadoop performance. Combining with the actual situation of analysis system, we propose a performance analysis and evaluation scheme. Then we explain the reasons for choosing the running times of three benchmark applications as the evaluation benchmark of the performance of analysis cluster. Afterwards, we list selected performance data and introduce data collection system based on Flume. Moreover, we introduce basic content of two kinds of modeling approaches, linear multiple linear regression and nonlinear BP neural network, which would be used to modeling the evaluation benchmark and performance data. Finally, we analysis and evaluate the performance of analysis system through the two validated models, comparing their pros and cons, then guide user behavior and
optimize the performance of the system by the analysis and evaluation results.
KEY WORDS:performance evaluation;hadoop;multiple linear regression;BP neural network;execution time prediction

