摘要
认知无线电通过利用无线环境中频谱空洞来提升频谱利用率，其核 心技术之一是频谱感知。经典的频谱感知算法基于信号的时频空域信息 对频谱占用情况进行感知。信号的极化域特征也是可区分授权信号和噪 声信号的有用信息之一。近年来，课题组研究了利用信号极化域信息的 感知算法，为频谱感知技术开辟了新的维度。但实际场景存在两个问题: 信道的不理想特性造成双极化天线对信号的接收有一定角度，进而减小 天线接收到的能量；滤波器不理想或环境的影响使得噪声不服从理想的 高斯分布，进而改变接收信号统计特性，即到达角和非理想噪声都会降 低极化域频谱感知算法性能。
基于上述问题，本论文依托于北京高校青年英才计划专项《非正交 极化认知无线电频谱共享理论与技术》和北京邮电大学青年科研创新计 划专项《TD-LTE系统中基于认知无线电的极化频谱共享研究》，对存在 到达角和非理想噪声场景下的极化域频谱感知算法进行研究。主要内容 如下：
(1)综述了频谱感知技术的基本原理并总结归纳了经典的时、频、空 域感知算法，介绍了经典极化学及极化信号处理技术的主要应用场景, 并且分析了现有极化域频谱感知算法。指出到达角和非理想噪声会使得 极化域频谱感知算法性能变差。
(2)针对到达角降低极化域频谱感知算法性能这一问题，对考虑到达 角的极化域频谱感知进行了研究。建立感知模型的同时，分析了到达角 对接收信号统计特性的影响，并且通过仿真验证了到达角使得极化域频 谱感知算法性能恶化。针对这一问题，基于广义似然比检验(Generalized LikeUhood Ratio Test, GLRT)理论，推导出最优的考虑到达角的极化盲频 谱感知算法。最后，通过数值仿真证明，到达角存在时，新算法比与未
考虑到达角的感知算法相比有7dB的性能优势。
(3)针对非理想噪声降低极化域频谱感知算法性能这一问题，研究 了联合考虑到达角和非理想噪声的极化域频谱感知。该内容根据噪声 的具体分布差异，分为了两部分进行研究。功率不平衡的高斯噪声假设 下，论文分别提出了基于GLRT的和基于预白化的考虑到达角的极化域 频谱感知算法。并通过理论分析和数值仿真验证两种新算法以已有算法 相比，分别有2dB和5dB的性能优势。非高斯噪声假设下，论文提出了 非高斯噪声下考虑到达角的极化域盲感知算法，数值仿真证明噪声非高 斯时，新算法与高斯白噪声假设下的算法相比有4dB性能优势。
关键词:极化域频谱感知;到达角;功率不平衡噪声;非高斯噪声;广义似然比检验
RESEARCH ON POLARIZATION SPECTRUM SENSING ALGORITHMS
ABSTRACT
Through the real-time spectrum sensing and using of the spectrum, cognitive radio (CR) is able to improve the utilization rate of spectrum in wireless environments. In recent years, in addition to classical spectrum sensing algorithms based on time, frequency or space domain information of signal, spectrum sensing algorithms using polarization information have attracted researchers 'attention. The research opens up a new dimension for the spectrum sensing technology.
Due to both of the arrival angle and non-ideal noise can influence the performance of polarization spectrum sensing, supported by Beijing Higher Education Ybung Elite Teacher Project and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central University, main contents of this dissertation are:
(1)The dissertation overviews principles of spectrum sensing, and classical sensing algorithms which based on time, frequency and space domain information. Polarization theories and technologies are included. Then existing polarization spectrum sensing is been analyzed. Finally, the dissertation pointed that polarization sensing algorithms do not consider the presence of arrival angle and non-ideal noise.
(2)We propose polarization information based spectrum sensing methods considering arrival angle, due to the presence of arrival angle, which can reduce the received energy of primary signal and then degrade the performance of polarization detectors. Using the generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT) paradigm, we derive a blind Polarization and Arrival angle Eigenvalue Detection (PAED), which is the optimal polarization algorithm in the presence of arrival angle. Our results show that the proposed PAED exhibits 7dB better performance than other existing techniques, particularly when the number of
in samples is small, which is critical in vehicular applications.
(3)We propose a new polarization based spectrum sensing method in CR, considering both of the arrival angle and non-ideal noise, which degrade the performance of polarization spectrum sensing algorithms. There are two aspects of this part. The first aspect is research of polarization spectrum sensing in power imbalance noise. The blind GLRT based and Pre-whiten based algorithms are proposed. And the two algorithms achieves 2dB and 5dB performance than traditional methods perspectively. The second aspect is research of polarization spectrum sensing in Non-Gaussian noise. Based on the analysis of statistical information, we propose blind GLRT based sensing algorithm in presence of arrival angle in Non-Gaussian noise. Numerical simulation results show this method obtains 4dB gain than those without considering NonGaussian noise.
KEY WORDS:Polarization spectrum sensing;Arrival angle;Power imbalance noise;Non-Gaussian noise;Generalized likelihood ratio test

