摘要
突发通信广泛应用于军事通信、公众应急通信领域。由于无线信 道的时变、多径特征严重影响了突发通信的传输可靠性和传输效率, 因此同步及信道估计方式一直是突发通信的关键研究技术。
本论文针对多载波突发通信系统中的同步问题，设计了一种新的 基于PN序列加权CAZAC序列的训练序列，提出了相应的利用时频 二维搜索算法的时频联合同步算法，能够准确的完成OFDM通信系 统中的定时同步和频偏估计；该算法消除了已有的以CAZAC序列作 为训练序列的算法中定时度量函数的副峰干扰，提高了定时同步的性 能。本论文针对多载波突发通信系统中的定时估计问题，引入压缩感 知的相关理论，提出了一种充分利用实际信道的缓变特性的压缩感知 信道估计算法；该算法利用多个连续OFDM符号的联合信道估计算 法，仿真验证了该算法的可行性及优良性能。本论文还设计实现了一 套单载波短波突发通信系统，介绍了该系统的实现方法，针对该系统 中同步和信道估计算法进行了理论分析和系统仿真。
关键词:突发通信;短波通信;同步;信道估计
RESEARCH ON SYNCHRONIZATION AND CHANNEL ESTIMATION IN BURST COMMUNICATION ABSTRACT
Burst communication is widely used in military communication and public emergency communications. Due to the time variation and multipath characteristics of the wireless channel, the transmission reliability and transmission efficiency of burst communication are seriously affected, so the synchronization and channel estimation are key technologies of burst communication.
To solve the synchronization problem for multi-carrier burst communication system, this paper designs a new training sequence based on PN weighted CAZAC sequence, and put forward the corresponding two-dimensional search algorithm of timing and frequency synchronization algorithm, which can accurately complete the timing synchronization and frequency offset estimation for OFDM communication system. The algorithm eliminates the side peak of the timing metric function in algorithm based on CAZAC sequence and improves the performance of timing synchronization. Aiming at the timing estimation problem of multi-carrier burst communication system, this paper takes advantage of compressed sensing theory and puts forward a compressed sensing channel estimation algorithm, which makes ful 1 use of the slow varying characteristics of actual channel. The proposed algorithm is a joint channel estimation algorithm which takes advantage of multiple consecutive OFDM symbols. Simulation results show the feasibility and excellent perfomiance of the proposed algorithm. This paper also proposed a single-carrier HF burst communication system. The realization method of the system is introduced in this paper. Aiming at the synchronization and channel estimation algorithms for the proposed system, theoretical analysis and system simulation are presented.
KEY WORDS:Burst communication;Shortwave Communication;Synchronization;Channel estimation


