摘要
近几年来，伴随物联网的迅速发展，物联网设备产生的信息量也越来 越大。如何对这些信息进行有效的处理和响应已成为物联网平台的重要问 题。已有的基于规则的处理方案对规则定义的要求过于严格，使得在实际 使用中十分繁琐。因此，在已有的物联网资源模型的基础上，本论文提出 了一个使用与管理已有物联网知识的事件处理与管理系统一知识子系统。
知识子系统主要提供知识的使用和管理功能，在物联网系统资源模型 和发布订阅系统之上提供基于0标和推理的事件处理方案。本文工作主要 包括以下几个方而。
为了方便管理者与使用者利用巳有的物联网资源知识进行复杂事件处 理和新应用的开发，本论文设计与实现了统一的物联网系统知识管理，包 括物联网资源模型与实例的管理、事件的知识定义、事件与资源的知识映 射管理、以及抽取的复杂事件知识管理。其功能包括图形化知识建模、知 识存储、基于图的知识查询；以及面向用户的知识增、删、改、查，通过 增加中间索引层，完成用户可视化知识与底层存储的本体知识的分门别类 的关联。
在既有物联网知识模型基础上，实现知识发现和知识抽取等动态知识 管理，即基于物联网资源模型，对实时事件流进行处理,计算隐藏在资源 模型和事件背后有价值的复杂事件。本论文设计与实现了并发的复杂事件 处理系统，抽取动态知识，包括多推理单元的并发调度、资源实例「作范 围发现、资源实例与推理单元的映射、事件的知识转化、事件与推理单元 的映射、目标事件的知识化、以及基于 SMT证明的冃标事件发现。通过分 而治之的方法，实现大规模事件流的高效实时处理，完成物联网系统的动 态知识管理。
利用既冇的物联网系统中发布订阅通信基础设施接口，将实时事件引 入到知识子系统中，完成事件格式转化，方便后续的事件知识化。另外， 采用BS模式实现一个人机管理界面。
最后，利用深圳出租车GPS数据对系统进行了功能和性能测试，测试 结果表明，本论文所设计的物联网系统的知识子系统能够方便的对模型管 理和查询，及时的处理事件信息，并能结合用户需求迅速推理出结果。该 系统的实现对于物联网知识管理和事件处理问题具有一定的参考价值和意 义。
关键词:物联网;知识管理;本体;描述逻辑;一阶逻辑推理
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF KNOWLEDGE SUBSYSTEM OF IOT SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of Internet of Things (loT), the amount of information generated by loT is growing in recent years. How to deal with such information effectively has become an important issue for the loT platform. The existing rule-based processing scheme whose definition of rules is too strict, is very complicated in practice. Therefore, on the basis of existing loT resource model, this paper proposes a knowledge management subsystem, Knowledge Subsystem, which uses and manages the existing knowledge of the Internet of Things.
Knowledge subsystem mainly provides the use and management functions of knowledge. The system works with the loT system resource model and the PUB/SUB system to provide event processing solutions based on the objectives and reasoning. The main work of this paper includes three aspects.
In order to facilitate managers and users to use the loT knowledge for complex event processing and new application development, this paper designs and implements a unified knowledge system, including the management of the loT resource model and resource instance, knowledge management of event, mapping management between event and resource, and knowledge management of complex event extraction. Its functions include graph-based knowledge modeling, knowledge storage, graph-based knowledge querying, object-oriented knowledge management, and implementation of the association between the user visualization knowledge and the ontology knowledge of the underlying storage by adding an intermediate index layer.
The system implements the dynamic knowledge management on the basis of the existing loT resource model, such as knowledge discovery and in
knowledge extraction, that is, processing the real-time event flow based on the loT resource model, and computing the complex events hidden behind the resource model and events. This paper designs and implements a complicated event processing system, including concurrent scheduling of multiple reasoning units, resource instance work scope discovery, mapping of resource instance and reasoning unit, transformation between event and knowledge, mapping of event and reasoning unit, knowledge transformation of target events, and target event discovery based on SMT reasoning. The system realizes the real-time processing of large-scale event flow and the dynamic knowledge management by means of divide-and-conquer method. The real-time events are introduced into the knowledge subsystem by using the existing communication infrastructure interface of PUB/SUB system in the existing loT system. The system completes the event format conversion and implements a Browser-Server mode human-computer interface.
Finally, we conduct function test and performance test on the system, the test results show that the knowledge management subsystem based on loT platform can conveniently manage and query the model, process the event information in time, and combine with the user's requirement quickly reasoning out the results. The realization of this system has some reference value and significance for the knowledge management of loT.
KEY WORDS:loT;Knowledge Management;Ontology;DL;FOL

