摘要
由于Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity)技术的遍及以及Wi-Fi信号的 覆盖率的不停提升，使Wi-Fi定位转变为可能的定位手段，无论是住 宅楼、学校、办公室，抑或是超市、博物馆、公交车等公共场所都已 经被Wi-Fi信号覆盖。与此同时，人们的日常生活越来越需要定位服 务，这种需求为定位技术的发展带来了契机，越来越多的研究者也将 精力转移到定位算法的研究中。但是室内环境是一个复杂的环境，无 线电在室内的传播会受到多径传播、衍射等因素的影响，从而使室内 定位的精度大打折扣。现有的算法如ToA(Time of Arrival)、 TDoA (Time Difference of Arrival)、AoA (Angle of Arrival)等定 位算法都会在复杂环境中产生较大的误差。因此，提高室内定位的精 度，提高定位算法的效率，改善现有定位系统，已成为世界各地的学 者潜心研究的热门课题之一。
云计算的出现催促了定位研究的发展。Hadoop是通过Google云 计算平台开源实现的，它利用了 MapReduce对大数据集进行并行运 算，使系统具有分布存储海量数据、并行处理任务、较高的性能和可 靠性等特点。实验中，基于MapReduce计算模型重点对模型改进、模 型的实现、任务调度、负载均衡等方面进行了深入的分析。文章通过 考察传统Wi-Fi定位算法在执行效率上的不足，提出利用Hadoop云 计算平台改善定位系统。如何使用MapReduce思想实现对海量位置信 息的分析处理并且应用于定位，是本文研究课题的创新点和难点。
本文以Hadoop云平台为基础，分析研究了将云计算的MapReduce 并行处理技术应用在Wi-Fi定位算法的改良和实现等相关课题。论文 首先深入地介绍了 Wi-Fi定位系统的研究现状，重点研究了 Wi-Fi的 测距定位算法。然后，在前面研究的基础上，引入局部线性回归算法 和位置加权的概念，提出了基于MapReduce的改进Wi-Fi定位算法， 并实现了实验系统的设计。最终，构建基于Hadoop的系统测试环境， 在该硬件环境下完成了 Wi-Fi定位算法的功能测试和性能测试。实验 的测试成果的分析说明：文中通过改良而设计的Wi-Fi定位算法具有 可靠的定位结果和不俗的执行效率，可以在大量数据涌入系统时，于 短时间内完成定位过程。
1
关键词：Wi-Fi定位；Hadoop; MapReduce;局部线性回归；位置加权
2
RESEARCH AND IMPLEMENTATION OF WI-FI LOCATION ALGORITHM BASED ON MAP-REDUCE
ABSTRACT
With the popularity of Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) technology and Wi-Fi hotspot coverage in recent years, continuous improvement has made Wi-Fi targeting possible and feasible. Wliether residential buildings, schools, offices, or supermarkets, museums, buses and other public places have been Wi-Fi signal coverage. At the same time, the daily life of people increasingly need location-based services, this demand for the development of positioning technology has brought opportunities, more and more researchers will focus on positioning algorithm research. However, in complex environments, the existing algorithms such as ToA (Time of Arrival), TDoA (Time Difference of Arrival), AoA (Angle of Arrival) and other localization algorithms will cause errors because of the interference of radio waves. So, how to improve the accuracy of positioning to provide better location services is a popular research topic in recent years.
The emergence of cloud computing promotes the further development of wireless location technology. Hadoop is a Google Cloud Computing platfonn open source implementation. It uses the programming model of MapReduce to realize parallel computing of large-scale data sets, which makes the system provided with the characteristics of distributed storage of massive data, parallel processing tasks, high performance and reliability. In the experiment, we take in-depth analysis on the realization and improvement of the model, task scheduling, load balancing and other aspects based on the MapReduce calculation model. How to improve the Wi-Fi location algorithm from the traditional ones on the Hadoop cloud computing platform and how to use the MapReduce idea to realize the analysis and processing of the massive location information are the innovation and difficulty points of this paper.
Based on the Hadoop cloud platfonn, this paper analyzes and studies
3
the application of MapReduce parallel processing technology in cloud computing to the implementation and improvement of Wi-Fi location algorithm. In this paper, the research status of Wi-Fi positioning system is introduced firstly and a lot of research is emphasized on the algorithm of ranging location based on Wi-Fi. Then, with the previous research, we introduce the concept of local linear regression and position weighting and propose an improved Wi-Fi location algoritlim, which is based on MapReduce and applied to the designed experimental system. At last, the experiment environment of Hadoop cluster is set up, on which the function and perforoiance of the algorithm are tested. The analysis of the test results shows that the improved Wi-Fi location algorithm has reliable localization result and good execution efficiency, and can complete the positioning process in a short time when a large amount of data is flooded into the system.
KEY WORDS: Wi-Fi location, Hadoop, MapReduce, Local linear regression, Position weighting.
4
