摘要
近几年来高速铁路的建设在中国如火如荼的展开，高速移动环境下的通信已 成为移动通信的又一重要场景。与此同时，伴随着智能手机的普及，移动用户对 于数据业务的要求越来越高。作为下一代移动通信标准，3G长期演进LTECLong Term Evolution),需要满足在高速移动环境下正常的通话和高速数据传输业务。
高速移动环境下的通信系统与低速环境有明显不同。用户与基站之间存在较 高的相对速度，这会产生较大的多普勒频移和多普勒拓展。其中较为明显的变化 就是相干时间缩短，无线通信信道会在短时间内发生剧烈变化。为了抑制多径信 道带来的频率选择性衰落,ETE系统下行链路釆用正交频分复用技术(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing, OFDM)作为无线传输技术。然而，OFDM 系统 对频率偏移十分敏感，即便是很小的频率偏移都会引起较大的误码率。所以，在 高速移动环境下，多普勒频偏估计补偿巳经成为LTE系统下行链路中亟待解决 的重要问题。目前，ETE中OFDM系统的频偏估计在低速场景已经较为成熟， 但是高速移动带来的多普勒频率偏移(Carrier Frequency Offeet, CFO)比低速场 景下更严重，现有的低速场景下的算法已经无法满足系统要求。由于提出新算法 难度较大，本文着重研究经典的频偏估计算法,并在经典算法的基础上进行改良, 找出更加适合这种特殊环境下的改进算法。
在改进载波频率估计算法之前，我们需要充分考虑OFDM系统的原理结构、 高速移动环境下信道的模型参数等影响因子。论文在总结当前已存在的经典频偏 估计算法的基础上，着重研究了两种算法。其中一种算法估计后在频域补偿，这 种算法是在传输符号的序列内插入导频，接收端通过导频序列进行频偏估计。另 一种S&C算法估计后在时域上进行补偿，这种算法是在一串符号前面插入训练 符号用来估计频偏。在这两种算法的基础上，我们提出了三种改良的或适应特殊 信道环境的频偏估计算法。
关键词：高速移动信道环境，LTE无线通信系统，OFDM系统，频偏估计算法, S&C算法，导频算法
RESEARCH ON FREQUENCY OFFSET ESTIMATION
IN OFDM SYSTEM OF LTE
ABSTRACT
In recent years, the high-speed railway has developed rapidly in China, and accordingly, the communication in the high-speed mobile environment has become an important scene in mobile communication system. Therefore, being the next generation mobile communication standard, the Long Term Evolution (LTE) must meet the data transmission at the high speed mobile environment.
However, communication system in the high-speed mobile environment is significantly different from normal environmental scenarios. Wireless communication channel is more complicated during the larger Doppler frequency shift which comes from the relative movement between users and the base station. The most obvious changes are the shortening of coherence time and drastic changing of the wireless communication channel with a short time. In order to suppress the frequency selective fading, LTE system uses Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) in downlink. But OFDM system is very sensitive to the frequency offset. Even small frequency offset will cause a large rate of error. Therefore, the frequency offset estimation and compensation has become a significant issue in the high-speed mobile environment. Currently, although the frequency offset estimation of OFDM system in LTEis mature during the low-speed environment, the high-speed brings larger carrier frequency offset (CFO), which causes the existing algorithms unable to meet system requirements. Since it's difficult to propose a new algorithm, this paper focused on improving the classical frequency estimation algorithms and finding out the suitable algorithms fbr the particular environment
We need to take full consideration of the factors, including the OFDM system structure and the parameters of high-speed channel environment before improving the classical frequency estimation algorithms. On the basis of summarizing the current classical algorithm, there are two kinds of algorithm we focused on in this paper. One is to estimate CFO in the frequency domain, which means by inserting a set of pilot sequences in the transmitted sequence of symbols to estimate CFO. The other is S&C algorithm, that is inserts the training symbols in front of data symbols to estimate ni
CFO in time domain. Based on these two algorithms, we proposed three kinds of modified frequency offset estimation algorithm.
KEY WORDS： LTE, OFDM SYSTEM, FREQUENCY OFFSET ESTIMATION
iv
