摘要
Turbo码于1993年被法国学者C.Berrou等人提出，一经问世就 因其接近香农限的优异性能而被广泛使用。对于深空通信而言，由于 信道编码需要克服远距离传输的低信噪比和传输环境的衰落影响，所 以空间数据系统咨询委员会(CCSDS)选择Turbo码作为卫星通信和 深空通信的信道编码标准。本论文所研究的Turbo译码器的应用场景 为基于超远距离传输的MIMO-SCFDE通信系统，具有传输距离远、 传输时延长等特点，故本论文对Turbo译码器的研究采用了 CCSDS 标准结构。
Turbo码虽然性能优异但是译码结构较为复杂，所以本论文主要 针对Turbo码的低复杂度译码方案展开研究，着重研究了一种基于 SOVA算法的简化算法。首先，为降低计算复杂度，本论文的研究从 快速寻找最大似然路径和降低分支路径数量两方面入手，得到了一种 复杂度较低的SOVA译码方案。其次，将该低复杂度算法应用到基于 CCSDS标准的Turbo码中，并在基于超远距离传输的MIMO-SCFDE 通信系统中开创性地应用Turbo均衡方案，利用该低复杂度Turbo译 码器与均衡器迭代传递互信息，提升系统对抗衰落和干扰的能力。最 后，经过充分地性能仿真及复杂度分析，开发该简化算法的C语言定 点程序，为后续在DSP或ARM上应用该算法提供便利。
本论文研究的低复杂度Turbo译码算法，虽然在译码性能上与 Log-MAP算法有约0.3dB的差异，但是在计算量和存储量上相比于 传统的Log-MAP算法和SOVA算法有大幅度下降，在高信噪比条件 下，存储量降低超过50%0在此基础上，将Turbo均衡方案应用于 MIMO-SCFDE系统，通过链路级仿真进一步验证了本论文研究的低 复杂度Turbo译码器在超远距离传输中的应用价值。
关键词 Turbo译码器 低复杂度SOVA Turbo均衡
RESEARCH ON LOW COMPLEXITY ALGORITHMS AND APPLICATIONS OF TURBO DECODING
ABSTRACT
Turbo code was proposed by French scholar C. Berrou and others in 1993. Once it came out, it was widely used because of its excellent performance close to Shannon limit. For deep space communication, because channel coding needs to overcome the low signal-to-noise ratio of long distance transmission and the fading effect of transmission environment, the Consultative Committee fbr Space Data System (CCSDS) chose Turbo code as the channel coding standard for satellite and deep space communications. The application scenario of this project is MIMO-SCFDE communication system based on ultra-long distance transmission, which has the characteristics of long transmission distance and long transmission time. Therefore, CCSDS standard structure is adopted in the research of Turbo decoder.
Turbo code has excellent performance, but its decoding structure is too complex. So this topic mainly focuses on the low complexity decoding scheme of Turbo code and focuses on a simplified algorithm based on SOVA algorithm. Firstly, in order to reduce the computational complexity, the research of this topic starts with finding the maximum likelihood path quickly and reducing the number of branch paths, and obtains a SOVA decoding scheme with lower complexity. Secondly, this low-complexity algorithm is applied to Turbo codes based on CCSDS standard, and the Turbo equalization scheme is pioneered in MIMO-SCFDE communication system based on ultra-long distance transmission. The low-complexity Turbo decoder and equalizer are used to iteratively transmit mutual information to enhance the system's ability to resist fading and interference. Finally, after full performance simulation and complexity analysis, the C language fixed-point program of the simplified algorithm is developed to
facilitate the subsequent application of the algorithm on DSP or ARM.
The low-complexity Turbo decoding algorithm studied in this paper has about 0.3dB inferiority in decoding performance compared with LogMAP algorithm, but it has a significant reduction in computation and storage compared with the traditional Log-MAP algorithm and SOVA algorithm. Under the condition of high signal-to-noise ratio, the storage is reduced by more than 50%. Moreover, Turbo equalization scheme is applied to MIMO-SCFDE system, and the application value of the low complexity Turbo decoder in ultra-long distance transmission is further verified by link level simulation.
KEY WORDS: Turbo Decoder Low-complexity Turbo Equalization SOVA
