摘要
基于 LED 的可见光通信(Visible Light Communication, VLC) 作为一种新兴的无线通信技术，由于其低功耗、抗电磁干扰以及高安 全性等优点，得到了越来越多的关注和研究。VLC利用发光二极管 (Light Emitting Diode, LED)照明装置实现通信，这就使得其需要 兼顾照明和通信的双重需求。对于任何照明系统来说，无论从能源节 约还是生态效益上来说，其通常都需要具备调光功能，即可以动态的 调节其亮度。此外，由于LED调制带宽较窄，一般为几MHz,无法 满足高速通信的要求。为了提高VLC系统的通信速率，具有高频谱 效率和抗码间干扰(Inter Symbol Interferende, ISI)等特性的射频 (Radio Frequency, RF)正交频分复用(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing, OFDM) (RF-OFDM)技术被引入 VLC 系统中。由于 VLC 一般采用强度调制/直接检测(Intensity Modulation/Direct Detection, INWD),所以传输的信号必须为正的实信号，这就使得 RF-OFDM调制无法直接运用于VLC系统中，因此，大量的研究者 开始研究适合于VLC系统的OFDM调制。与此同时，基于OFDM 的VLC系统调光技术也亟待研究和讨论。
基于上述问题，本论文依托华为创新研究项目(Huawei Innovation Research Program, HIRP)(编号：HIRP020150101),针 对基于OFDM的VLC系统(称为OFDM-VLC系统)调光技术进行 了研究。主要研究内容如下：
1	.综述了 VLC 中的 OFDM (称为 Optical OFDM, O-OFDM)调 制技术的基本原理和研究现状，并对调光技术以及OFDM-VLC系统 调光技术的现状进行了总结和分析。通过分析指出了现有的 OFDM-VLC系统调光技术的不足和问题。
2	.针对采用两种主流O-OFDM调制方案：DCO-OFDM (Direct Current Biased Optical OFDM)和 ACO-OFDM (Asymmetrically Clipped Optical OFDM)的单链路VLC系统在考虑模拟调光时，不同 亮度范围下两种方案通信性能互补的问题，提出了一种将两种调制方 案结合应用于一个 VLC 系统的 AAD-OFDMC Asymmetrical And Direct Current Biased Optical OFDM)方案，并给出了改进调制方案的实现
系统框图。然后重点分析了系统的切换方式，通过建立最优化问题, 确定了最佳的亮度切换门限。该方案利用自适应亮度切换方式，在不 同的亮度下选取当前系统最佳的调制方案，很好的弥补了原来单一调 制方案的缺陷，使得在整个调光范围内，系统的通信性能较之于单一 方案都有所提高。
3	.针对实际场景中，单个LED亮度有限，通常一盏灯中会有多 个LED,所以本文自然地从考虑单链路VLC系统拓展为考虑多链路 VLC系统。相比于单链路VLC系统，多链路VLC系统无疑增加了 空间这一维度。如何充分利用空间这个维度，进一步的提升系统的性 能。针对此问题，本文提出了 一种ST-OFDM ( Separately Transmitted Optical OFDM)调制方案,该方案的基本原理是将双极性DCO-OFDM 信号分离为两个单极性信号，两个单极性信号分别驱动不同的LED, 然后在空间进行叠加重建出原始DCO-OFDM信号。此外，为了提高 系统的调光性能，本文创新性地提出一种模拟调光和空域调光联合的 调光技术。其通过联合控制LED的发光亮度和发光LED的数目来调 节整个lamp的亮度。仿真证明，无论是通信性能还是调光性能，其 都优于采用 SD-OFDM (Spatial Dimming Optical OFDM)和传统的 DCO-OFDM调制方案的系统。
关键词：可见光通信OFDM调光
RESEARCH OF DIMMING TECHNOLOGY FOR VISIBLE LIGHT COMMUNICATION BASED ON OFDM
ABSTRACT
As a new type of wireless communication technology, Visible Light Communication (VLC) based on LED has drawn more and more attention due to its low power consumption, anti-electromagnetic interference and high security. VLC uses Light Emitting Diode (LED) lighting devices to communicate, which makes it necessary to take into account the dual needs of illumination and communications. For any lighting system, it is usually necessary to have a dimming function to dynamically adjust its brightness for energy conservation or eco-efficiency. In addition, due to the narrow modulation bandwidth of LED, which is generally a few MHz, it can not meet the requirements of high-speed communications. In order to improve the communication speed of the VLC system, Radio Frequency (RF) Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) (RF-OFDM) technology with high spectral efficiency and ISI (Inter Symbol Interference) is introduced into the VLC system. Because VLC is generally based on Intensity Modulation/Direct Detection (IM/DD), the transmitted signal must be a positive real signal, which makes the RF-OFDM modulation can not be directly applied to the VLC system. Therefore, a large number of researchers have begun to study OFDM modulation suitable for VLC system. Meanwhile, the dimming technology of VLC system based on OFDM also needs to be researched and discussed urgently.
Based on the above problems, this dissertation is based on the Huawei Innovation Research Program (HIRP) (HIRP020150101) and focuses on the dimming technology of VLC system based on OFDM (called OFDM-VLC system). The main research contents are as follows:
1.	This paper first reviews the basic principles and research status of OFDM (referred to as Optical OFDM, O-OFDM) modulation technology
in
in VLC, and summarizes and analysis the status quo of the dimming technology and the dimming technology of OFDM-VLC system. The deficiencies and problems of the existing OFDM-VLC system dimming technology are pointed out through analysis.
2.	For a single-link VLC system adopting two main O-OFDM modulation schemes: DCO-OFDM (Direct Current Biased Optical OFDM) and ACO-OFDM (Asymmetrically Clipped Optical OFDM), when considering analog dimming, the communication performance of the two schemes in different luminance ranges is complementary. A scheme, named AAD-OFDM (Asymmetrical And Direct Current Biased Optical OFDM), which combines the two modulation schemes and is applied to a VLC system, is proposed in the paper. And the system block diagram of the AAD-OFDM is given. Then the emphasis is placed on how to switch the system. By setting up the optimization problem, the optimal brightness switching threshold is determined. The scheme uses the adaptive brightness switching mode to select the best modulation scheme of the current system under different brightness and makes up for the defects of the original single modulation scheme, so that the communication performance of the system is better than that of a single modulation scheme under whole dimming range.
3.	In the actual scenario, the brightness of a single LED is limited and there will usually be more than one LED in a single lamp. Therefore, we naturally extend from considering single-link VLC systems to multi-link VLC systems. Compared to single-link VLC systems, multi-link VLC systems undoubtedly add space dimension. How to make full use of space dimensionto further enhance the system performance. In order to solve this problem, this paper proposes a ST-OFDM (Separately Transmitted Optical OFDM) modulation scheme. The basic principle of this scheme is partitionthe bipolar DCO-OFDM signal into two unipolar signals and then they separately drive diflerentLEDs. The two signals are then summed in spacethus reconstructing DCO-OFDM signals. In addition, in order to improve the dimming performance of the system, a new dimming technology using analog dimming and space dimming is proposedin this paper. It adjusts the brightness of the lamp by jointly controlling the
IV
brightness of the glared LED and the number of glared LEDs. The simulation results show that both the communication performance and the dimming performance are superior to the system using SD-OFDM (Spatial Dimming Optical OFDM) and the traditional DCO-OFDM modulation scheme.
KEY WORDS: Visible Light Communication, OFDM, Dimming
