摘要
随着无线通信的发展以及移动终端的普及，基于位置的服务 (LocationBased Service, LBS)越来越受到关注。室内定位技术是实 现室内LBS的关键。可见光室内定位技术是一类极具潜力的室内定 位技术，它以可见光通信(Visible Light Communication, VLC)系统 为基础，利用可见光信号进行定位，具有精度高、基础设施密度高以 及可以在对电磁信号敏感的地方使用等优势。
论文选题来源于华为创新研究项目(Huawei Innovation Research Program, HIRP)(项目编号：20150101 )。基于接收信号强度(Received Signal Strength, RSS)的可见光室内定位算法是研究得最为广泛的一 类可见光室内定位算法，但是普遍存在着需要限制或已知接收器方向 以及覆盖较低的问题。为了解决上述问题，本文针对不同的系统模型， 提出了三种基于RSS的可见光定位算法，并联合它们形成一种多模 定位机制。本文的主要研究内容如下：
一、对发射器进行了改进，设计了由多个不同方向的发光二极管 (Light Emitting Diode, LED)组成的多角度 LED 阵列(Multiple Directional LED Array, MDLA)作为发射器，并提出了 MDLA 下基 于RSS的可见光室内定位算法，在算法中利用接收信号强度比 (Received Signal Strength Ratio, RS SR)进行定位。使用该算法，光 电二极管(Photodiode, PD)接收到至少一个MDLA即可进行2维 (2-Dimensional, 2-D)定位，接收到至少2个 MDLA即可进行3维 (3-Dimensional, 3-D)定位。该算法在实现高精度定位的同时，无需 限制或已知PD的方向，并且相比于传统的单LED下使用三边定位 法的基于RSS的可见光室内定位算法，可以覆盖更多的接收器位置 和方向。仿真显示，对于3-D定位，当MDLA中LED的倾斜角为15。 时，所提算法95%的定位结果的误差小于19cm,并且比传统算法能 多覆盖11.1%的位置和13.1%的方向。
二、对接收器进行了改进，设计了由多个不同方向的PD组成的 多角度 PD 阵列(Multiple Directional PDArray, MDPA)作为接收器， 并提出MDPA下基于RSS的可见光室内定位算法，该算法分为两个 阶段：先利用PD相对MDPA的相对方向和RSSR估计入射角，然后
利用入射角估计值和RSS估计位置。使用该算法，MDPA只需接收 到至少3个LED就可以进行3-D定位。该算法在实现厘米级精度的 同时，无需限制或已知MDPA （或PD）的方向。仿真显示，当MDPA 中PD的倾斜角为15。时，95%的定位结果的误差小于5cm。
三、结合上述两个研究成果，进一步地在定位系统中同时使用 MDLA作为发射器、MDPA作为接收器。首先，针对只有单个MDLA 的情况，提出了 MDLA和MDPA下基于RSS的可见光室内定位算 法，该算法分为三阶段：基于RSSR的辐射角估计、基于RSSR的入 射角估计和基于RSS的位置估计。使用该算法，MDPA接收到单个 MDLA时即可进行3-D定位，且计算过程无需迭代求解。该算法在 实现厘米级精度的同时，无需限制或已知MDPA （或PD）的方向。 仿真显示，当MDLA中LED的倾斜角和MDPA中PD的倾斜角都为 15。时，95%的定位结果的误差小于8cm。其次，针对有多个MDLA 的情况，将上述三个定位算法（单模算法）进行联合，形成MDLA-MDPA多模定位机制，对于三类不同的信号接收情况，可以使用不同 的定位算法进行定位，在同时发挥这三个定位算法的自身优势的同时, 也可以比其中任一单模算法获得更高的覆盖。
关键词：可见光通信室内定位接收信号强度多角度LED 阵列多角度PD阵列
INDOOR VISIBLE LIGHT LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM BASED ON RECEIVED SIGNAL STRENGTH
ABSTRACT
With the development of wireless communication and the popularization of mobile terminals, location based service (LBS) has attracted increasing attention. Indoor localization is a key technology of indoor LBS. Indoor visible light localization is a promising candidate for indoor localization. It is based on the visible light communication (VLC) system, and utilizes the visible light signals to implement localization. It is capable of high accurate localization, has economical and dense infrastructure due to the wide adoption of light-emitting diodes (LED) and can be free employed in electromagnetic sensitive environments.
The topic of this thesis comes from the Huawei Innovation Research Program (HIRP) (No. 20150101). The received signal strength (RSS) algorithm is the most widely used kind of indoor visible light localization algorithm. However, existing RSS algorithms usually require the receiver orientation limiting or knowing, and their coverage is not high. To address the problems above, we proposed three kinds of RSS algorithms for different system models, and combined them as a multi-model localization scheme. Main research contents of this paper are listed as follows:
1.	In the improvement of the transmitter, a multiple directional LED array (MDLA) consisting of multiple LEDs pointing to different directions is designed as the transmitter. Furthermore, a localization algorithm based on RSS with MDLA is proposed, which utilize the received signal strength ratio (RSSR) to localize the photodiode (PD). Using the proposed algorithm, a PD only requires to detect one MDLA for 2-dimensional (2D) localization and two for 3-dimensional (3-D) localization. The proposed algorithm can attain high accuracy without limit to or need for the knowledge of the PD orientation, and can cover more locations and
orientations of the receiver compared to the conventional RSS algorithm using the triangulation method with the lamp structure of a single LED. Simulation results show that when the tilt angle of LEDs is 15°, in the proposed algorithm for 3-D localization, the errors of 95% localization results are below 19cm, and it can cover 11.1% more locations and 13.1% more orientations of the receiver than the conventional triangulation
2.	In the improvement of the receiver, a multiple directional PD array (MDPA) consisting of multiple PDs pointing to different directions is designed as the receiver. Furthermore, a localization algorithm based on RSS with MDPA is proposed, which involves two phases: the incidence angle estimation based on RS SR with the relative orientation of PD with respect to the MDPA, and then the location estimation based on RSS with the estimate of the incidence angle. Using the proposed algorithm, a MDPA only requires to detect three LEDs for 3-D localization. The proposed algorithm can attain centimeter-level accuracy without limit to or need fbr the knowledge of the orientation of the MDPA (or the PD). Simulation results show that when the tilt angle of PDs is 15°, the eiTors of 95% localization results are below 5cm.
3.	Furthermore, combining the research results above, employ the MDLA as the transmitter and the MDPA as the receiver simultaneously in the localization system. Firstly, in the case of using only one MDLA, a localization algorithm based on RSS with MDLA and MDPA is proposed, which involves three phases: the iiTadiance angle estimation based on RS SR, the incidence angle estimation based on RS SR, and then the location estimation based on RSS. Using the proposed algoritlim, a MDPA only requires to detect one MDLA fbr 3-D localization, and there is no iterative procedure in the computation. The proposed algorithm can attain centimeter-level accuracy without limit to or need for the knowledge of the orientation of the MDPA (or the PD). Simulation results show that when the tilt angle of the LEDs in MDLA and the PDs in MDPA are both 15°, the errors of 95% localization results are below 8cm. Secondly, in the case that multiple MDLA exsit, the thi'ee kinds of localization algorithms proposed above are combined as a MDLA-MDPA multi-model localization scheme, using which the three different localization algorithms can be
employed fbr three different signal receiving conditions. The MDLA-MDPA multi-model localization scheme can not only give full play to the advantages of these three algorithms, but also possess higher cover than anyone of them.
KEY WORDS: visible light communication indoor localization received signal strength multi-directional LED array multi-directional PD array
