摘要
近年来，随着信息技术的发展，具有相同语义的文本、图像、视 频等跨模态数据呈爆炸式增长。用户可以随时随地产生、分享与传播 这些数据，形成了用户与数据间紧密复杂的社会交互。因此，跨模态 数据和用户都不是孤立存在的，都有明显“社交化”的趋势。分析与 挖掘模态间的关联进行跨模态检索已成为该领域的重要研究课题，但 现有方法大多孤立研究跨模态数据，没有处理数据中由于“社交化” 带来的复杂语义关联，也就不能有效缓解跨模态数据的异构鸿沟问题。 此外，现有跨模态检索研究都是侧重学习数据的关联匹配，但并未考 虑这种匹配是否是用户需要的，即没有深入分析检索中用户的个性化 需求，解决存在的用户意图鸿沟问题，导致用户很难精确检索到需要 的信息。因此，充分挖掘跨模态数据间的语义关联以及理解个性化的 用户需求对提升跨模态检索的性能具有重要意义。该研究课题依托于 北京市教育委员会的科学研究与研究生培养共建的科研项目一一基 于社交感知的跨媒体数据分析与挖掘研究。
本论文通过感知社交信息，对跨模态检索中的数据异构鸿沟问题 与用户意图鸿沟问题做了深入研究，旨在从两个方面提高检索性能。 主要的研究内容与创新成果包括：
1	.针对跨模态数据的异构鸿沟问题，提出一个结合链接与内容 的跨模态关联学习方法。现有跨模态检索的方法大多利用数据的共现 与互补特性，研究跨模态数据的关联表达，未能充分挖掘数据间的语 义关联。本论文利用跨模态数据社交性的特点，感知跨模态数据的社 交信息，利用社交关联增强异构数据的语义关联。在本研究中，针对 数据中存在的复杂关联，本文利用异构信息网络对数据进行建模，网 络中的语义链接可以有效表示不同的社交关联。为了学习跨模态间的 语义关联，本文将链接关联与跨模态底层内容整合到一个统一的框架 中，并学习一种有效的映射机制，将异构的数据映射到一个共同的语 义子空间中，进而缓解数据的空间异构问题，实现模态间的相互检索。 在扩充的NUS-WIDE数据集中的大量实验表明，所提的关联学习方 法能有效提升跨模态检索的性能。
2	.针对跨模态检索中的用户意图鸿沟问题，提出一种基于社交 多模态主题模型的用户兴趣建模方法。在跨模态检索中，用户经常不
能清楚准确地表达自己在另一种模态下的信息需求，经常存在查询模 糊、不明确等问题，但传统利用用户元数据、查询或点击日志等单模 态数据的建模方法不适用于跨模态检索情景。因此，本文提出感知社 交媒体中用户丰富的多模态行为数据来挖掘用户兴趣，并利用长期兴 趣表达检索意图，得到个性化的检索结果。在本研究中，针对数据的 多模态性及稀疏性等挑战，本文构建了一种社交多模态主题模型。该 模型不仅同时对多模态数据进行建模，使得兴趣模型能灵活地应用在 跨模态检索中；而且在模型中还考虑了用户好友兴趣的社交影响，提 高了兴趣表达的鲁棒性与准确性。此外，在真实数据集中的大量实验 证明了该建模方法的有效性。
关键词：跨模态检索 关联学习 多模态主题模型 用户建模 个 性化
ABSTRACT
RESEARCH ON SOCIAL-SENSED CROSS-MODAL RETRIEVAL
ABSTRACT
With the development of information technology, the resent years have witnessed the explosive growth of cross-modal data, such as text, image and video, which have the same semantics. Users can produce, share and disseminate these data anytime, anywhere, forming a close and complex social interaction between users and data. Therefore, the cross-modal data and users do not exist in isolation, they all have clear "social" trends. Analysis and mining of the correlation between different modalities for cross-modal retrieval has become an important research topic in this area. However, most of the existing methods study the cross-modal data in isolation and don5t deal with the complex semantic correlation due to the "socialization", so it can't solve the heterogeneous gap effectively. In addition, the existing research on cross-modal retrieval focuses on learning the correlation matching, however whether such matching is required by users doesn't considered. That is to say, there isn't analysis of individual needs, so it can't solve the user need gap, which makes it difficult fbr user to get required information. Hence, it is of great significance to fully exploit the semantic correlation between cross-modal data and understand the needs of individual users to improve the performance of cross-modal retrieval. This research is based on the co-construction project of scientific research and postgraduate cultivation supported by Beijing education committee, which is analysis and mining on social-sensed cross-media data.
This paper investigates the problem of heterogeneous gap and intention gap in depth using the sensed social information, aiming to improve the retrieval performance from two perspectives. The main research contents and innovations include:
1.	In order to handle the problem of heterogeneous gap between different modalities, this paper propose a correlation learning method by
in
combining link and content. Most existing methods study the correlation representation through the character of co-occurrence and complementarity, which can't capture semantic correlation thoroughly. This paper use the social characteristics and sense the social information, to enhance the semantic correlation between heterogeneous data by using social correlation. In order to handle the complex correlation, this study use heterogeneous information networks to model the data, so the different semantic social con'elation can be represented by network link. In order to learn the semantic con-elation, this paper incorporate link-based correlation and bottom-level content into a unified framework. At the same time, learning an effective transfbmi mechanism, so the heterogeneous data can be mapped into a common semantic subspace. What's more, the spatial heterogeneity of data can be eliminated to achieve cross-modal retrieval. Experiments on expanded NUS-WIDE dataset show that the proposed method can effectively improve the performance.
2.	In order to deal with the problem of need gap between cross-modal data and the information needs of users, this paper propose a model of user interest based on social multi-modal topic model. In cross-modal retrieval, users often can't express their information needs in other modalities clearly, lead to the ambiguity of query. Moreover, the traditional methods of modeling single-modal data such as user metadata, query or click log are unsuitable for cross-modal retrieval. Therefore, this paper sense the rich multi-modal data in social media to mine user interest, and retrieval needs can be expressed by long-teim interest to get personalized results. In order to handle the challenges of multi-modal and noise, this study proposes a social multi-modal topic model. The model not only modeling multi-modal data simultaneously, which can be applied to cross-modal retrieval flexibility; but also take social influence of friends5 interests into account, which can improve the robustness and accuracy of the interest expression. In addition, the experimental results verify the effectiveness of this method.
KEY WORDS: cross-modal retrieval correlation learning multimodal topic model user modeling personalization
