摘要
随着移动互联网、物联网、云计算等新技术的快速发展，虚拟现实、 智能交通、工业物联网、远程医疗、智慧城市等丰富多样的新兴业务不 断涌现，导致移动数据业务流量爆炸性增长。为了提高网络承载能力, 第五代移动通信（5G）网络一方面在热点区域密集化部署不同类型的基 站提升网络容量，另一方面，通过引入网络虚拟化、不同接入网络异构 融合等新技术实现动态组网模式和智能资源适配，满足不同应用场景下 个性化、定制化的服务需求。然而，工业物联网、自动驾驶、远程医疗、 大规模机器通信等5G典型应用对移动网络的可靠性提出了更高的性能 要求，而当前针对移动网络的可靠性理论及新技术研究是5G增强网络 （B5G）研究面临的关键难题之一。本论文主要基于随机几何理论针对移 动异构网络的可靠性理论及分析开展研究，重点解决以下难题：（1）异 构网络密集化导致小区间干扰更加复杂且强度大，加剧了网络可靠性保 障及提升的难度，同时可靠性分析也缺乏基本理论支撑；（2）异构多层 组网导致网络节点分布更加随机化，与传统六边形蜂窝模型差异显著, 实际部署缺乏理论建模指导。
本文基于随机几何理论，以成功概率与Meta分布为出发点，构建移 动异构网络可靠性性能分析的理论框架模型，以此为基础深入开展移动 异构网络的可靠性能分析研究。文中首先针对“空域协作”组网场景开 展表征网络平均可靠性的成功概率分析，又针对更广泛的“空域协作” 组网技术开展链路可靠性的Meta分布分析。然后，进一步研究空-时域互 相结合的“空时协作”组网场景，分析该场景下表征链路可靠性的Meta 分布。最后，将Meta分布理论分析框架模型从单用户场景拓展到多用户 场景，理论上首次推导出多用户（或位置）的联合Meta分布，并将该理 论应用于物理层安全、多用户协作场景的理论分析。本文的主要研究内
I
容及创新点总结如下：
(1)文中构建了移动异构网络的随机几何分析方法理论框架模型, 基于此开展了 “空域协作”组网场景下移动异构网络协同多点传输/接 收(Coordinated multipoint transmission/reception, CoMP)相干联合传 输(Joint transmission, JT)方式的网络平均可靠性分析研究。文中首先 基于成功概率和Meta分布的基本概念构建了理论分析框架模型，分析了 Gil-Pelaez方法、Beta近似方法等几种Meta分布的有效计算方法，通过 Meta分布与成功概率的对比，证明了 Meta分布包含更细粒度的链路可 靠性信息。然后，针对移动异构网络下行链路，构建异构协作网络数学 模型，定义一般用户和最坏情况用户两类典型用户模型，理论分析了表 征网络平均可靠性的成功概率等基础性能指标。利用随机几何理论分析 支持相干JT的一般用户和最坏情况用户的信干比(Signal-to-interference ratio, SIR)性能；利用Alzer不等式等数学定理，推导出成功概率的上界 和近似解。最后，通过数值计算和蒙特卡洛仿真验证了所推导理论上界 的准确性，为实际网络部署提供了理论指导。
(2)针对移动异构网络“空域协作”组网场景，首次分析推导出移 动异构网络不同基站协作组网方式的Meta分布。本文将(1)所构建的 异构协作网络模型推广到多种不同的下行CoMP协作组网技术，包括JT 和动态节点选择/静默(Dynamic point selection/blanking, DPS/DPB)。文中 基于Meta分布性能指标重点分析了 JT和DPB结合的更具有一般普适性 的技术方案JT-DPB等。首先，推导出一般用户和最坏情况用户条件成 功概率的b阶矩；然后，给出JT-DPB方案两类用户的平均本地时延，观 察到平均本地时延从有限值跳变到无限值的相位转移现象，并给出其发 生相位转移的临界值；最后，利用Gil-Pelaez方法和Beta近似方法通过 b阶矩求解，并分析上述多种不同协作组网方案的Meta分布。理论分析 结果表明，相较于成功概率，Meta分布提供了更精细化的链路级可靠性 信息，能更显著呈现多种协作组网方式的性能差异，并揭示了不同方案 的优势以及不同网络参数对其性能的影响。
（3）针对空、时域互相结合的“空时协作”组网场景，提出“空域协 作"JT-DPB和"时域协作"混合自动重传请求（Hybrid automatic repeat request, HARQ）相结合的组网方案，首次推导出移动异构网络不同类型 HARQ技术表征链路可靠性性能的Meta分布。针对移动异构网络下行 链路，文中推导出Type-IHARQ （独立尝试）和Type-II HARQ （追逐合 并）两类HARQ技术与“空域协作" JT-DPB的相互结合方案下两类用户 条件成功概率的b阶矩，并利用Beta近似方法由b阶矩获得Meta分布 的分析结果。针对Type-IIHARQ,构建了一种简化的异构网络模型，并 给出了。阶矩的紧密上界，仿真验证了该模型具有良好的精确性和普适 性。最后，理论分析结果显示空时协作之间的平衡组合可以达到最佳的 用户链路性能；协作集基数越大，简化异构网络模型近似效果越好；与 Type-I HARQ相比，Type-II HARQ在重传次数为2的情况下具有与重传 次数为3的Type-I HARQ相当的性能，为实际网络的空时协作组网应用 提供了链路可靠性的理论支持。
（4）针对多用户无线组网场景，将Meta分布理论分析模型从单用 户场景拓展到多用户场景，理论上首次推导出多用户（或位置）的联合 Meta分布，还将该理论应用于物理层安全、多用户协作接收场景的理论 分析。文中首先给出”阶联合Meta分布、联合条件成功概率和简化的 n阶乘积Meta分布的一般化定义。重点研究两用户的2阶乘积Meta分 布在一维、二维泊松蜂窝网络中的相关性质，推导出联合条件成功概率 的b阶矩，为乘积Meta分布提供基础分析方法。然后，开展了 2阶联合 Meta分布理论在物理层安全和协作接收方面的理论应用研究，主要关注 下行链路。针对物理层安全场景，构建典型合法用户和附近的窃听者的 联合性能分析模型，推导出条件机会安全频谱接入概率的Meta分布。针 对多用户协作场景，分析推导出其条件协作成功概率的Meta分布。理论 分析结果表明，对于较大的SIR门限，不能忽略用户之间的SIR相关性, 联合Meta分布分析框架能够支持在涉及多个链路时对无线网络进行精 确的性能分析，对实际网络部署具有重要意义。当窃听者与合法用户之间的距离增加时，网络的链路可靠性也会提高，并且逐渐接近无保密通 信约束的Meta分布。
关键词:移动异构网络性能分析随机几何 Meta分布成功概率 协同多点传输技术
STOCHASTIC GEOMETRY BASED PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR MOBILE HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of new technologies such as mobile Internet, Internet of Things (loT), and cloud computing, a variety of emerging services such as virtual reality, intelligent transportation, industrial loT, telemedicine, and smart cities continue to emerge, resulting in explosive growth in mobile data traffic. In order to improve the network carrying capacity, the fifth generation mobile communication (5G) network densely deploys different types of heterogeneous base station nodes in hotspot areas to increase network capacity. On the other hand, by enabling new technologies such as network virtualization and heterogeneous integration of different access networks, the dynamic networking mode and intelligent resource adaptation are realized to meet the personalized and customized service requirements in different application scenarios. However, the typical applications of 5G such as industrial loT, autonomous driving, telemedicine, and massive machine type communications (mMTC) have put forward higher performance requirements for the reliability of mobile networks. The current research on the reliability theory and new technologies of mobile networks is one of the key challenges faced by the beyond 5G (B5G) network research. This dissertation is mainly based on stochastic geometry theory to carry out research on the reliability theory and analysis of mobile heterogeneous networks, and focuses on solving the following problems: (1) The densification of heterogeneous networks leads to more complicated and strong inter-cell interference, which exacerbates the difficulty in guaranteeing and improving network reliability, and the reliability analysis lacks the basic theoretical support; (2) Heterogeneous multi-layer networking causes more randomized network node distribution, which is significantly different from the traditional hexagonal cellular model, and the actual deployment lacks theoretical modeling guidance.
This dissertation takes the perspective on the success probability and the new performance metric-meta distribution, and builds a theoretical framework model for reliability analysis of mobile heterogeneous networks based on stochastic geometry. On this basic, it conducts in-depth research on reliability analysis of mobile heterogeneous networks. In this dissertation, the success probability characterizing the average reliability of the network is firstly analyzed for the “spatial cooperation^^ networking scenario, and then the meta distribution analysis is carried out fbr the first time to reveal the link reliability for the broader “spatial cooperation^^ networking schemes. Next, this dissertation further study the “spatiotemporal cooperation^^ networking scenario where the cooperation of the spatial and temporal domains are combined with each other, and analyze the meta distribution to characterize the link reliability in this scenario for the first time. Finally, the meta distribution theory analysis framework is extended from single user to multiple user. For the first time, the joint meta distribution of multiple users (or locations) is theoretically derived, and this theory is applied to the theoretical analysis of physical layer security and cooperation scenarios. The main research contributions and innovations of this dissertation are summarized as follows:
(1)	This dissertation gives the theoretical framework of the stochastic geometric based analysis method for mobile heterogeneous networks, and for the “spatial cooperation^^ networking scenario, the average performance analysis of the coordinated multipoint (CoMP) coherent joint transmission (JT) is carried out. First, the basic concepts of the success probability and the meta distribution are formally defined, which construct a theoretical analysis framework. Several effective calculation approaches for the meta distribution such as the Gil-Pelaez approach and the beta approximation are discussed and analyzed. The comparison between the meta distribution and the success probability highlights that the meta distribution can provide more fine-gained information about the individual link reliability. Then, for the
downlink of mobile heterogeneous network, a heterogeneous cooperation network model and two types of typical user models which include the general user and worst-case user are proposed, and the basic performance metric—success probability is analyzed to characterize the average performance of networks. Based on the stochastic geometry theory, the signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) perfoimance of general users and worst-case users with coherent JT is theoretically analyzed for the first time. Using two inequalities including Alzer's inequality, the upper bound and approximation of the success probability are given. Finally, numerical results and Monte Carlo simulations verify the accuracy of the proposed theoretical upper bound, and provide the theoretical guidance for the actual network deployment.
(2)	Aiming at the “spatial cooperation^^ networking scenario of mobile heterogeneous networks, the meta distribution for different networking schemes of the base station cooperation is analyzed and derived for the first time. The heterogeneous cooperation network model proposed in (1) is extended to analyze a variety of different downlink CoMP cooperation schemes, including JT and dynamic point selection/blanking (DPS/DPB). Based on the SIR meta distribution, the general scheme JT-DPB combined with JT and DPB has been rigorously analyzed and studied in theory for the first time, as well as the DPS/DPB scheme. The b-th moment of the conditional success probability for the two types of typical users has been derived, and the mean local delay is given in the JT-DPB scheme, where the critical value of the phase transition from finite to infinite is observed from the mean local delay. Using the b-th moment, the Gil-Pelaez approach and beta approximation approach are used to obtain the meta distribution of the above-mentioned different cooperation schemes. The theoretical analysis results show that compared to the success probability, the meta distribution provides more refined link-level reliability information, and can significantly distinguish the performance differences of multiple different cooperation technologies, and reveals the advantages of different cooperation schemes and the perfomiance impact of different network
parameters.
(3)	Aiming at the ^spatiotemporal cooperation“ networking scenario, this dissertation proposes a combined networking scheme of “spatial co-operation^^ JT-DPB and “temporal cooperation^^ hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), and derives the meta distribution for different types of HARQ techniques in mobile heterogeneous networks to characterize the link reliability performance. For downlink mobile heterogeneous networks, this dissertation mainly focuses on two types of HARQ techniques: Type-I HARQ (independent attempt) and Type-II HARQ (chase combining). Under this spatiotemporal cooperation scheme, the b-th moment of the conditional success probability for two types of users are derived, and the beta approximation approach is used to obtain the meta distribution. For Type-II HARQ, a simplified heterogeneous network model is proposed for the first time, and the tight upper bound of the Z?-th moment is given. Simulation results verify that the proposed simplified heterogeneous network model has great accuracy, and can be used in the research of a large number of other transmission techniques. Theoretical analysis results show that the balanced combination of spatiotemporal cooperation can achieve the best user link performance; the larger the size of the cooperation set, the better the approximation of the simplified heterogeneous network model; Type-II HARQ has a performance equivalent to Type-I HARQ with 3 retransmissions when the number of retransmissions is 2. The analysis provides the theoretical guidance about link reliability for the application of the spatiotemporal cooperation networking in actual networks.
(4)	Aiming at multi-user wireless networking scenarios, the meta distribution theory analysis model is expanded from single user to multiple user, and the theoretical analysis framework for the joint meta distribution of multiple users (or locations) is proposed and derived for the first time. Furthermore, this theory is applied to the theoretical analysis of physical layer security, and cooperation scenarios. The generalized definitions of the n order joint meta distribution, the joint conditional success probability, and the
VIII
simplified n order product meta distribution are given for the first time. Focusing on the basic mathematical problems, the 2 order product meta distribution for two users is studied in a one-dimensional and two-dimensional Poisson cellular network. The b-th moment of the joint conditional success probability is derived in order to provide the basic analysis method for the product meta distribution. Then, the 2 order joint meta distribution theory is used in two application scenario as the examples, including the physical layer security and cooperative reception. For the physical layer security scenario, a joint performance analysis model of typical legitimate users and nearby eavesdroppers is constructed to derive the meta distribution of the probability of the opportunistic secure spectrum access. For the cooperative reception scenario, a multi-user cooperation reception scheme is proposed, and the meta distribution of its conditional cooperation success probability is analyzed. The theoretical analysis results show that, for larger SIR thresholds, the SIR correlation between users cannot be ignored. The joint meta distribution analysis framework can give the accurate performance analysis of wireless networks when multiple links are involved, so it is of great significance. As the distance between the eavesdropper and the legitimate user increases, the link reliability of the network will also improve, and it will gradually approach the communication without the secure constraint.
KEY WORDS: mobile heterogeneous network perfbnnance analysis stochastic geometry meta distribution success probability CoMP
