摘要
近年来，基于位置的服务为人们的生活带来了极大的便利。这些 应用的发展也给无线定位技术提出了新的要求，例如更高的精度和泛 在的服务。目前主要使用的定位技术基于卫星星座，由于覆盖不足, 其在市区或者室内精度下降。基于无线网络（如蜂窝网络和WLAN）的 定位技术因为其具有城市覆盖强，易于部署等特点，而受到了广泛关 注。其中，到达时间差和位置指纹定位是两种常用的无线网络定位技 术。本文对无线网络定位中的一些问题进行了研究，主要研究内容如 下：
1	.本文提出了一种新的位置指纹TDOPA （多径到达时间差）和对应的 定位算法。该位置指纹利用了多径传播中的位置特征。通过基于 高斯噪声的建模,本文分析了这种位置指纹的CRB（克拉美罗界）， 并且推导出一种定位算法。然后本文通过正确估计概率分析了这 种定位算法的性能。本文希望这些分析结果对于相关实验和算法 改进具有一定帮助。
2	.本文对PRS （定位参考信号）传播时延估计问题进行了研究。PRS 是LTE下行定位模式中测距所采用的参考信号，下行定位是一种 标准化的到达时间差方法。本文基于频域的信道矩阵处理，需要 解决多径数估计和时延估计的问题。本文提出了 MDL-MUSIC （最小 描述长度-多重信号分类）方法,它包括两步法和遍历法两种实现, 还提出了 SIC-DFC （串行干扰取消-差分频域相关）方法。根据链 路级仿真结果，MDL-MUSIC方法在较高信噪比条件下能给出更为 准确的估计，SIC-DFC方法具有复杂度低的特点。本文希望这些结 果对下行定位模式的最终精度提升有所帮助。
关键词：无线网络定位位置指纹定位PRS多径传播时延
ON POSITIONING TECHNIQUES BASED ON WIRELSS NETWORK
ABSTRACT
Recently, location based services bring a tremendous convenience to our daily life. The development of the services also makes new demands on wireless positioning technologies such as higher precision and ubiquitous support. At present, the major and popular wireless positioning methods are based on satellite constellation but facing degraded accuracy in urban areas and indoors because of poor coverage. Positioning methods based on wireless network (e.g. cellular and WLAN) are widely mentioned due to strong coverage in urban districts and easy deployment. There are two wireless-network-based methods in common use: time difference of arrival and location fingerprinting. This thesis focused on some problems in wireless network based positioning methods as follows:
1.	The thesis proposed a novel location fingerprint called TDOPA and a corresponding location algorithm. The fingerprint utilizes location characteristics in multipath propagation. On the foundation of a model with Gaussian noise, the CRB of the fingerprint is analyzed and a location algorithm is derived. The analysis of the performance of the algorithm is conducted using correct estimation probability. The thesis hopes the analysis results above are helpful in relative experiments and algorithm improvement.
2.	The thesis studied the problem of the estimation of flight delay for PRS (Positioning Reference Signal) dedicated for ranging in LTE downlink positioning method, a standardized time-difference-of-arrival method. The study handles the problem on the basis of channel matrix in frequency domain and needs to estimate the number and the delay of paths simultaneously. An MDL-MUSIC method was proposed, including two implements: a two-step method and a traversal method.
An SIC-DFC method was proposed as well. According to link-level simulation results, the MDL-MUSIC method can provide a more accurate estimation under high SNR (Signal Noise Ratio) and the SIC-DFC method has a benefit of lower complexity. The thesis hopes the results can contribute to the accuracy improvement of final location estimation in the downlink method.
KEYWORDS: wireless network positioning; location fingerprinting; PRS; multipath; propagation delay
