摘要
近年来，随着科技的发展无人机的身影已经频繁出现在各行各业 中，并且发挥了强大的作用。在军事领域无人机主要用于情报侦察、 军事打击、通信中继、空中预警等。近几年无人机不但用在军事上还 出现在生活中的各个角落，如检查油田、打击罪犯、协助搜救、协助 灾难救援等。
目前我们对无人机的使用大多数情况还是利用单机，控制方式仅 限于点对点的通信，即地面控制台同无人机的直接通信。利用多架无 人机组网执行任务，可以直接扩大服务空域、间接提升持续时长，进 而推动无人机的适用性发展。移动自组织网络从本世纪初开始获得了 研究者的广泛关注，在物理层、链路层、网络层和跨层设计方面都有 丰富的研究成果。在空中，无人机节点采用自组织形式进行组网是符 合其运行场景的方案，但因条件限制，对于无人机自组织网络的研究 还处于起步和仿真阶段，暂时没有成熟的技术用于真实的环境中。本 文为探索无人机可靠自组网机制，通过在NS-3仿真平台上搭建无人 机自组织网络，对多种场景进行仿真，并通过调整仿真参数对MAC协 议做了对比，为后续跨层可靠机制设计奠定基础。
本文的主要研究点集中在两方面。一是NS-3仿真平台的改进， 具体包括随机游走移动模型的改进、封装了一个容易获取仿真结果的 接收器和发送器；二是无人机自组织网络的典型MAC层协议分析对 比。在NS-3上设计实现了 Wifi MAC协议和TDMA MAC协议，并在不 同的场景下进行了大量的仿真，通过网络性能参数曲线图分析了两种 MAC协议的性能。
关键词：无人机，自组织网络，TDMA, Wifi 802. 11, NS-3
STUDY ON THE RELIABLE MECHANISM OF UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLE (UAV) AD HOC
NETWORK
ABSTRACT
In recent years, with the development of science and technology UAV has appeared frequently in many fields, and played a powerful role. In the field of military UAV is mainly used for intelligence reconnaissance, military strikes, communications relay, airborne early warning and so on. UAVs have not only been used in militarily but also in all aspects of life, such as checking oil fields, cracking down on criminals, assisting search and rescue, and assisting disaster relief.
At present, most of the use of UAVs is the use of single machine. The control method is limited to point-to-point communication, that is, the ground console communicates directly with the UAV. Using multiple unmanned aircraft network to perform tasks, you can expand the service airspace directly, enhance the duration indirectly, thus promoting the development of UAVs. Since the beginning of this century, mobile ad-hoc networks have drawn the attention of researchers. They have rich research achievements in the physical layer, link layer, network layer and crosslayer design. In the air, UAV nodes can meet the requirements of their operational scenarios by using ad-hoc network. However, the research on UAV ad-hoc networks is still in its infancy and in the simulation stage due to limited conditions. There are no mature technologies for Real environment currently. In order to explore the reliable ad-hoc mechanism of UAVs, This paper builds a UAV ad-hoc network on NS-3 simulation platform, simulates a variety of scenarios and compares the MAC protocol by adjusting the simulation parameters. These lay the foundation for the design of reliable crosslayer mechanism.
The main research point of this paper is focused on two aspects. The first is the improvement ofNetwork Simulatin 3 (NS-3), including the improvement of the random walk mobile model and the encapsulation of a receiver and sender that can easily obtain the simulation results. The second is the comparison and analysis of the typical MAC layer protocols of UAV ad hoc networks. On the NS-3, the Wifi MAC protocol and the TDMA MAC protocol are designed and implemented, and a large number of
simulations are carried out in different scenarios. The performance of the two MAC protocols is analyzed through the network performance parameter graph.
KEY WORDS: UAV? ad-hoc network, TDMA, Wifi 802.11, NS-3
