摘要
随着无线通信技术的快速发展以及智能终端的不断普及，无线通 信网络已经发展成为具有不同制式、接入方式和覆盖范围的异构网络。 为了减小授权频段的频谱压力，提升网络容量，LTE-U <LTE in Unlicensed Bands)网络快速发展，并与同样工作在5GHz非授权频段 的Wi-Fi (WirelessFidelity)形成典型的异构网络。同时为了提高频谱 利用率，认知无线电中的频谱共享已经应用于异构网络中。在没有任 何先验信息的情况下，认知用户通过覆盖式频谱共享的方式与主用户 同时工作在相同频段。为了减小对主用户通信的干扰，认知用户需要 根据信号盲识别的结果调整自身的工作参数，主要包括发射功率、调 制方式和载波频率等，因而在LTE-U与Wi-Fi异构认知网络中，LTE 与Wi-Fi信号盲识别研究具有重大意义。
论文选题来源于国家自然科学基金项目“密集异构无线环境下极 化资源感知与利用研究”(项目编号：61571062)。针对于5GHz非授 权频段下LTE与Wi-Fi信号盲识别这一问题，本文以信号处理技术为 理论基础，利用LTE与Wi-Fi信号特征参数的高阶谱不同的特性，分 别研究了 LTE与Wi-Fi单信号盲识别算法和LTE与Wi-Fi混叠信号盲 识别算法，解决了异构认知网络中LTE与Wi-Fi信号盲识别的问题， 将为想要以覆盖式频谱共享方式与Wi-Fi主用户和LTE-U主用户共享 5GHz非授权频段的认知用户提供可靠的可调整的工作参数。同时，在 已有信号盲识别技术研究基础上，本文研究内容将为日趋复杂、高动 态无线环境中的信号盲识别问题提供相关的理论支撑和解决思路，以 达到主动、快速进行信号盲识别的目的。本文的主要研究内容如下：
(1)论文总结分析了异构认知网络中信号盲识别技术的研究现状， 包括研究背景与意义，关键技术和主要挑战。指出在异构认知网络中， LTE与Wi-Fi信号有效特征参数的提取、加性高斯白噪声的干扰和信号 的盲源分离是影响本文研究信号盲识别技术的关键因素。
(2)针对于 LTE 与 Wi-Fi 信号均采用 OFDM( Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing)调制技术，导致它们在信号结构和特性方面具 有很强相似性的问题，本文根据3GPP/LTE (3rd generation partnership project/ Long Term Evolution)和 802.11/Wi-Fi 标准，当认知用户感知到 的信号仅仅为单一信号时，提出基于参数估计的LTE与Wi-Fi单信号 盲识别算法。在未知任何先验信息的情况下，本算法首先估计信号频 域上的FFT (Fast Fourier Transformation)点数，过采样率和有效子载 波特征参数，然后根据信号的有效子载波数的不同盲识别出LTE与 Wi-Fi单信号，最后通过理论分析和仿真验证表明，本文提出的基于参 数估计的LTE与Wi-Fi单信号盲识别算法性能比现有的基于高阶统计 量的OFDM信号盲识别算法性能提升约5dBo
(3)在LTE-U与Wi-Fi异构认知网络中，认知用户感知到的信号 不仅仅是LTE与Wi-Fi单信号，还可能是LTE与Wi-Fi混叠信号，针 对于该情况，本文提出了基于盲源分离的LTE与Wi-Fi混叠信号盲识 别算法。本算法首先根据信号频域的高阶谱特性改进信号联合对角化 算法，将混叠信号分离后，然后根据信号的特征参数盲识别出已分离 的信号，最后理论分析和仿真验证表明所提算法性能比基于传统联合 对角化的LTE与Wi-Fi混叠信号盲识别算法性能提升约4dBo
本论文在异构认知网络LTE与Wi-Fi信号盲识别技术研究中，采 用基于信号高阶谱的技术，解决了高斯白噪声对于信号盲识别的干扰 问题，并为信号盲识别的研究提供了新思路。
关键词：异构认知网络LTE-U Wi-Fi信号盲识别高阶谱
RESEARCH ON BLIND RECOGNITION OF LTEAND WI-FI SIGNALS IN HETEROGENEOUS COGNITIVE NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of wireless communication technology and the increasing popularity of intelligent terminals, wireless communication networks have evolved into heterogeneous networks with different standards, access methods and coverage. In order to reduce spectrum pressure in the licensed band and increase network capacity, LTE-U network rapidly develops and forms a typical heterogeneous network with Wi-Fi that also operates in the unlicensed band of 5GHz. At the same time, in order to improve the spectrum utilization, spectrum sharing in cognitive radio has been applied to heterogeneous networks. In the absence of any prior information, the cognitive user works in the same frequency band as the primary user at the same time through overlay spectrum sharing. In order to reduce the interference to the primary user communication, the cognitive user needs to adjust its own operating parameters according to the results provided by the blind recognition of the signal, and the operating parameters mainly include power, modulation and carrier frequency. Therefore, the study of the blind recognition of LTE and Wi-Fi signals is of great significance in LTE-U and Wi-Fi heterogeneous cognitive networks.
The task of this paper is from the national major projects for science: "polarization resource sensing and utilization in Dense and heterogeneous wireless environment (61571062)". Aiming at the problem of blind recognition of LTE and Wi-Fi signals in 5GHz unlicensed band, this paper takes the signal processing technology as the theoretical basis and utilizes the characteristic that the high-order spectrum of LTE and Wi-Fi signals is different, then blind recognition algorithm of LTE and Wi-Fi single and the blind recognition algotithm of LTE and Wi-Fi aliasing
in
signal are studied to solve the problem of the blind recognition of LTE and Wi-Fi signal in the heterogeneous cognitive network. And it will provide the reliable qnd adjustable operating parameters for the cognitive users which want to share the 5 GHz unlicensed bands with LTE-U users and Wi-Fi users by the way of spectrum underlay. At the same time, based on the research of signal blind recognition technology, the research content of this paper will provide theoretical support and solution for the blind recognition of signal problem in the increasingly complex and highly dynamic wireless environment, so as to achieve the purpose that is initiative and rapid blind recognition of signal. The main contents of this paper are as follows:
(1)	This paper analyzes and summarizes the current research status of blind recognition of signal in heterogeneous cognitive networks, including the research background and significance, the key technologies and the main challenges. In this paper, it is pointed out that, the extraction of effective characteristic parameters of LTE and Wi-Fi signals, the interference of additive white Gaussian noise and the blind source separation of signals are the key factors that affect the blind recognition of signal in the heterogeneous cognitive network.
(2)	For the situation that LTE and Wi-Fi signals use OFDM modulation technology, it leads to that LTE and Wi-Fi have a strong similarity in the signal structure and characteristics. According to 3GPP / LTE and 802.11 / Wi-Fi standards, this paper proposes the blind recognition algotithm of LTE and Wi-Fi signal based on the estimation of parameter is proposed when the signal sensed by cognitive user is single. Without knowing any prior information, the number of FFT, the oversampling rate and the effective subcarrier parameters is estimated firstly, and then LTE and Wi-Fi is recognition based on the different of the effective subcarrier number. Finally, the theoretical analysis and simulation results show that the performance of the blind recognition algorithm of LTE and Wi-Fi signal based on the estimation of the characteristic parameters is improved by about 5dB compared with the blind recognition algorithm of OFDM signal based on the high order statistics.
IV
(3)	In LTE-U and Wi-Fi heterogeneous cognitive networks, the signals are sensed by cognitive users are not only the LTE and Wi-Fi single signals, but also the the LTE and Wi-Fi aliasing signals. A blind recognition algorithm of LTE and Wi-Fi aliasing signal based on blind source separation is proposed. In the proposed algorithm, the joint diagonalization algorithm is improved according to the high-order spectral characteristics firstly, and then the sepatated signal is recognized according to the characteristic parameters of the signal. Finally, theoretical analysis and simulation verify that the performance of the proposed algorithm is improved by about 4dB compared with the blind recognition algorithm of the LTE and Wi-Fi aliasing signal based on tiie traditional joint diagonalization method.
In this paper, the blind recognition technology of LTE and Wi-Fi signals in heterogeneous cognitive networks is studied. The problem that the performance of the blind recognition of signals is influenced by the Gaussian white noise is solved by using the high order spectrum technique of signal. And the study of this paper provides a new way to the, blind recognition of signal.
KEYWORDS: heterogeneous cognitive networks, LTE-U, Wi-Fi, blind recognition of signal, high order spectrum
