摘要
随着计算机科学技术的发展，复杂系统的研究成为许多科学和工 程上必然要面对的问题。与线性系统不同的是，非线性系统的求解是 非常困难的，特别是在维度很高的情况下。动力学的研究侧重于定性 而非定量分析。为了更好的了解系统的动力学特性，提取出主要模式 是非常必要的，一个好的提取方案必然涉及到降维或坐标变换。随着 数据采集的发展，相对较低的成本就可以获取复杂系统的大量数据。 如何从这些数据中推断非线性系统的动力学或统计性质，是现代应用 动力学研究的一个重要组成部分。对于高效的数据驱动方法的探索一 直在继续，并且在理论或应用学科中显得越来越迫切。比较常用的分 析方法，如POD和Balanced POD,其线性特性阻碍了对相空间高度非 线性特征的有效表示。而一些常用的非线性技术，如等距离映射和扩 散映射等，主要目的是为了描述相空间的几何结构，而高维非线性系 统其相空间的几何结构非常复杂，描述将变得十分困难。如何在全局 尺度定性的描述相空间不变结构仍然是一个巨大的挑战。Koopman算 符的谱性质和Koopman模式揭示了轨道附近的一些我们感兴趣的不 变结构。在动力系统的演化过程中，Koopman分析更关注如何提取出 系统的主要模式以及有哪些统计特征能够用来追踪动力系统的分岔 或混沌。该方法在高维的推广可以更好的对系统进行控制以及进行预 测，在各领域都有巨大的应用价值。
本论文主要研究利用Koopman模式分解算法对动力系统进行模 式提取，以及利用这些模式对系统动力学性质进行追踪。首先将 Koopman分析的方法应用到二自由度耦合振子系统单条轨道上，得到 模式的基本频率信息，增长速率以及对应的空间结构，证明了该方法 的有效性。然后通过追踪初始点沿着庞加莱截面上的一条直线变化的 过程中对应轨道主要模式的幅值大小变化，检测到沿该直线相空间动 力学性质的变化。最后将该方法拓展到三自由度耦合振子模型中，也 得到了相似的结论。通过这种局部追踪动力学的方法，将轨道结构分 割为多个不变子集，避免了非线性系统轨道可能的整体复杂性，即使 在高维的情况下也可以高效辨别部分相空间的重要轨道特征，有利于 我们从整体上把握相空间特性，对高维相空间进行粗粒化处理，理解
系统演化过程中出现的定性变化。
关键词：Koopman算符谱分析模式提取Koopman模式 分岔
THE KOOPMAN ANALYSIS OF NONLINEAR COUPLED OSCILLATOR SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
With the development of probing and computing technology, the study of complex systems becomes a necessity in many science and engineering problems. Except for linear systems, it is usually very difficult to resolve nonlinear systems, especially in high-dimensions. The study of dynamics focused on qualitive rather than quantitative features. In order to better understand the dynamic characteristics of the system, it is necessary to extract the main mode. A good extraction scheme must involve dimension reduction or coordinate transformation. With the advancement of data-collecting technology, it becomes possible to obtain large amount of data for complex systems with relatively low cost. How to deduce dynamical or statistical properties of nonlinear systems from these data constitutes a large part of applied dynamics investigation in the modem era. The quest for efficient data-driven methods ever continues and appears more and more urgent in either theoretical or applied disciplines, common linear analysis method, such as POD and balanced POD, the linear characteristics of which hinder the effective representation of highly nonlinear characteristics in phase space. Some common nonlinear techniques, such as equidistance mapping and diffusion mapping, are mainly used to describe the geometric structure of phase space. However, in highdimensional nonlinear systems, the geometric structure of phase space is very complex, and the description will become very difficult. It remains a great challenge to qualitatively describe the invariant structures at a global scale. The spectral properties of the operator and the Koopman modes of a typical orbit reveal interesting invariant structures near the orbit. In the evolution process of dynamical system, Koopman analysis focuses on how to extract the main modes of the system and what statistical characteristics can be used to track the bifurcation or chaos of the dynamical system. This
method can control and predict the system better in the promotion of high dimension, which has great application value in various fields.
In this paper, we mainly study the use of Koopman mode decomposition algorithm for system dynamics mode extraction, and use these modes to track the properties of system dynamics. Firstly, the Koopman analysis method is applied to a single orbit of a two degree of freedom coupled oscillator system, and the basic frequency information, growth rate and corresponding spatial structure of the mode are obtained, which proves the effectiveness of the method. Then, by tracking the amplitude change of the main mode of the corresponding orbit when the initial point changes along a straight line on the Poincare section, the change of dynamic properties of the phase space along the straight line is detected. Finally, the method is extended to the three degree of freedom coupled oscillator model, and similar conclusions are obtained. By this method of local tracing dynamics, the orbit strcture is divided into several invariant subsets to avoid the possible overall complexity of the nonlinear system orbits. Even in the case of high-dimensional, we can effectively identify the important orbital characteristics of part of the phase space, which is helpful for us to grasp the characteristics of the phase space as a whole, to coarsen the high-dimensional phase space, and to understand the qualitative changes in the process of system evolution.
KEY WORDS: Koopman operator; spectral analysis; mode extraction; Koopman mode; bifurcation
