摘要
随着我国通信市场逐渐步入成熟期，市场竞争焦点已由增量市场转向 存量市场，运营商开始积极变革用户保有策略，强化以用户为中心的发展理 念。因此，用户满意度提升的算法研究在运营商的智慧化转型中有着非常重 要的意义。应对用户投诉，传统方法采用事后补救，这样的处理方式严重影 响了用户感知。网络投诉既关联用户体验，又关联网络维护，在运营商的投 诉管理中尤为重要。为此，本文围绕网络投诉的预警与应对进行研究，运用 人工智能方法定位潜在投诉用户并制定分层分级的用户关怀策略，最终通 过降低投诉提升用户满意度。本文所做主要工作和创新如下：
(1)不同用户群体具有差异化的特征与诉求，针对该问题本文对用户 分群进行研究，提出了一种评估分群效果的度量函数；还提出一种基于半监 督聚类的用户分群算法，将专家经验与数据挖掘算法结合，基于密度峰值在 已有约束条件下进行迭代并完成划分。实验表明所提算法时间复杂度低，分 群结果更加均衡、有效，与运营商的实际工作匹配度更高。基于用户分群结 果提出敏感因子概念用于特征构造。
(2)针对网络投诉预警的研究，本文对Stacking集成分类算法做出改 进，提出TxT折循环训练方法，避免交叉学习问题，基于构造特征及原始 特征，融合多个基分类器的优势，构建网络投诉预警模型；提出净损函数用 于辅助决策模型最佳判决门限。实验表明所提算法能够有效提升预测性能， 更加精准地定位潜在投诉用户，减少企业损失。
(3)针对潜在投诉用户关怀优先级的研究，本文结合网络性能指标及 用户业务使用需求，基于用户打分数据，构建基于用户感知的网络性能评分 卡模型，定量预测用户网络满意度，最终输出满意度评分对应优先级。实验 表明所建模型可以根据满意度评分在指定用户群体中较好地预测出高危投 诉用户，为运营商企业搭建分层分级的用户关怀体系提供了理论依据。
本文工作为扭转当前投诉处理方式提供了理论支撑，也为提升用户网 络满意度提供了参考思路。
关键词：用户满意度投诉预警半监督聚类TxT折循环训练评分卡
RESEARCH ON THE ALGORITHM OF IMPROVING USER NETWORK SATISFACTION
ABSTRACT
As China's telecommunication market gradually enters the mature stage, the focus of market competition has shifted from the incremental market to the stock market. The operators have begun to actively change user retention strategies and strengthen the user-centric development concept. Therefore, the research on network satisfaction improving algorithm around user perception is of great significance in the intelligent transformation of operators. In response to user complaints, the traditional method of taking post-mortem remedies seriously affects user perception. Network complaints are not only related to user experience, but also to network maintenance, which is particularly important in operators' complaint management. To this end, this article focuses on the early warning and response of network complaints, uses artificial intelligence to locate potential complaining users and formulate care priorities, and finally improve user satisfaction by reducing complaints. The main work and innovations made in this article are as follows:
Different user groups have different characteristics and demands. Aiming at this problem, this paper studies the problem of user clustering. This paper proposes a metric function to evaluate the effect of clustering, and also proposes a user clustering algo-rithm based on semi-supervised clustering, which combines expert experience with data mining algorithms, and iterates and divides based on density peaks under existing constraints. Experiments show that the proposed algorithm has low time complexity, the clustering result is more balanced and effective, and it matches the operator's actual work more. Based on the result of user clustering, the concept of sensitivity factor is proposed for feature construction.
Aiming at the research of network complaint warning, this paper improves the Stacking integrated classification algorithm, proposes a T^T fold-ing loop training method, avoids cross-learning problems, and combines the advantages of multiple base classifiers based on structural features and original features to build
a network complaint warning model. The net loss function is proposed to assist the decision of the optimal decision threshold. Experiments show that the proposed algorithm can effectively improve prediction performance, locate potential complaining users more accurately, and reduce the losses of the enterprise.
Aiming at the research on the priority of potential complaining users, this paper combines network performance indicators, user service usage needs and user scoring data to build a network performance scorecard model based on user perception, to quantitatively predict user network satisfaction and finally outputs a corresponding satisfaction score priority. Experiments show that the model can predict high-risk complaining users in a specified user group based on satisfaction scores, which provides a theoretical basis for operators to build a hierarchical user care system.
This paper provides theoretical support for reversing the current complaint handling method, and also provides ideas for improving user network satisfaction.
KEY WORDS: user satisfaction complaint early warning semi-supervised clustering T^Tfold loop training scorecard
