摘要
随着无线通信本地业务的日益增长，蜂窝网络承载压力越来越 大。3GPP拟通过将终端直通（D2D）技术引入蜂窝网络，使临近终 端能够直接交换数据，分流本地通信流量，提升网络容量与资源利用 率，并支持公共安全环境中的应急通信。但D2D技术的引入，将使 网络整体干扰与调度问题变得更加复杂。其共存方式与无线资源管理 方案（RRM）一的设计对于二者的有效融合至关重要。
在此背景下，本文提出了一套完整的异构网D2D无线资源管理 方案，对LTE/D2D网络中的干扰感知与协调、功率控制、资源分配、 链路自适应机制及数据通信流程进行了详细设计，并基于相关硬件平 台进行了开发与实测验证。主要工作及创新点如下：
第一，在对共存网络不同资源复用方案、D2D控制方式及干扰 问题的详细分析对比后，提出了异构网络中基于少量蜂窝网络辅助、 自主感知的分布式D2D无线资源管理框架，兼顾有/无蜂窝网络环境 下的D2DRRM功能完备性。
第二，研究设计了分布式D2DRRM干扰认知与干扰协调方案。 其中针对蜂窝对D2D通信（C2D）干扰，提出了基于干扰测量并主 动避让的干扰避免机制；针对D2D对蜂窝通信（D2C）干扰，提出 了基于最高蜂窝业务损失率设定的干扰跟踪机制；针对D2D内部干 扰，提出了基于D2D公共控制信道的同步时隙冲突避免SSCA方案， 并基于此设计了适应LTE网络的D2D数据通信流程。
第三，提出了基于认知协调的D2D混合资源利用方案。其中针 对链路自适应，设计了适用于D2D的混合自动重传请求和自动调制 编码开闭环联合控制方案；针对正交（Overlay）与重用（Underlay） 混合资源选择，提出了一种基于分段预估信干噪比最大化D2D吞吐 的资源选择方案，在保证蜂窝用户性能的前提下，能够同时复用多蜂 窝用户资源。
第四，针对上述方案，开发实现了 LTE D2D自制终端，在不改 变现有基站的条件下，成功与LTE商用终端异构组网并进行了实际 验证。实测结果表明，本文提出的分布式D2DRRM方案能够按照设 定的蜂窝业务损失门限对D2D引入的干扰进行有效控制；能够发现 蜂窝网络中存在的频谱空洞并进行高效利用，提供对高速业务承载的
支持；满足资源重用条件时，蜂窝与D2D共用资源，实现较单一网 络频谱效率的大幅提升。并能通过扩展，支持有/无蜂窝网络环境的 无缝切换、D2D中继等功能。
关键词 Device-to-Device 异构网络 无线资源管理 分布式 干扰协调
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION VERIFICATION OF D2D RADIO RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SCHEME IN HETEROGENEOUS CELLULAR AND D2D NETWORKS
ABSTRACT
With the increasing demand driven by growing wireless local services, bearing pressure of cellular networks is becoming more and more serious. 3GPP proposes to introduce the Device-to-Device (D2D) technology into cellular networks, by which adjacent devices can exchange infbnnation directly. In this way, it will divert part of the local traffic from the base station, enhance network capacity and resource utilization, support public safety emergency communication environment. But with D2D technology introduction, the problem of global network interference and scheduling policy will become more complicated than ever. Proper designs of coexistence mode and radio resource management (RRM) schemes are essential for effective integration of these two communication methods.
This thesis presents a solution of D2D RRM in heterogeneous network, accomplishes the scheme designs of the interference sensing and coordination, power control, resource allocation, link adaptation mechanism and D2D data communication procedure in LTE/D2D networks. The implementation and verification are carried out based on the relevant hardware platform at last.
The main works and highlights of the thesis are the following:
Firstly, after the compare of different resource reuse plans, D2D control methods and interference patterns in coexistence network, a cognitive and little network-assisted D2D distributed RRM framework is proposed. With this framework, it can support D2D RRM both within and without cellular environment.
Secondly, D2D distributed interference sensing and coordination schemes are studied and designed. They are composed of three specific methods, including an interference avoidance method based on power measurement for Cellular-to-D2D (C2D) interference, an interference tracing method based on the maximum cellular traffic loss settings for D2D-to-Cellular (D2C) interference and a synchronous slotted collision avoidance (SSCA) scheme based on D2D common control channels for D2D intra-interference. According to SSCA, the corresponding D2D data transmission procedure under LTE networks is designed.
Thirdly, the hybrid resource utilization schemes based on sensing and coordination are presented, including the following methods. One is the specific D2D HARQ and AMC joint link adaption method. The other is a hybrid resource selection method using resource fragment and SINR prediction, which can reuse serveral cellular user resources at the same time without causing harmful influence to cellular users.
Fourthly, based on D2D RRM schemes designed above, a LTE-D2D hardware platform is implemented. Under the current LTE network, D2D devices are successfully networking along with LTE commercial terminals. The verification results figured out that distributed D2D RRM schemes proposed in this thesis would effectively control the C2D interference according to the loss threshold setting. The shared resource utilization opportunity could also be found and be made good use of to provide high proximity transmission speed. When the resource reuse conditions were met, D2D links would automatically share these resources with cellular links to achieve greatly enhancement of spectral efficiency compared with that in single type network. With some expansion, it could also support the seamless handover between within and without cellular coverage, D2D relay functions.
KEY WORDS: Device-to-Device, heterogeneous network, radio resource management, distributed, interference coordination
