摘要
随着车载业务类型的爆发式增长和城市车辆日趋密集化，有限的 频谱资源已经难以满足车联网的多种通信业务需求。为此，车联网引 入认知无线电，通过频谱共享技术共享丰富的频谱资源，缓解车联网 频谱资源紧张的问题。目前，认知车联网中通常共享具有良好穿透特 性的6GHz以下频段的频谱资源。然而，6GHz以下频段由于可使用 带宽有限，并不能完全满足车联网的通信需求。相比于6GHz以下频 段，具有丰富带宽资源的毫米波开始为人们所关注，但由于毫米波频 段极高的路径损耗和穿透损耗，仅使用毫米波通信难以在车联网中形 成稳定可靠的长期通信连接。因此，联合使用6GHz以下频段和毫米 波频段的频谱资源成为满足车联网通信需求的重要手段，有必要研究 认知车联网中的异质频谱共享技术。
论文选题依托于国家自然基金项目“密集异构无线环境下极化资 源的感知与利用研究”（项目编号：61571062）和北京市自然科学基 金项目“动态时空数据驱动下基于视频数据理解的车联网资源分配算 法研究”（项目编号：4202049）,在集成6 GHz以下频段和毫米波频 段的认知车联网中，研究异质频谱共享技术，主要研究内容如下：
一、针对车辆使用6 GHz以下频段和毫米波频段通信所造成的 异质频谱干扰问题，提出了基于干扰多图的异质频谱共享算法和基于 干扰感知多图的异质频谱共享算法。首先，构建了认知车联网异质频 谱共享模型，并通过网络演算理论将模型中的延时约束转化为信干噪 比约束，降低了链路通信延时在实际中获取的难度。然后，提出了基 于干扰多图的异质频谱共享算法，通过构建干扰多图量化车辆间的异 质频谱干扰，并设计了干扰多图着色算法进行异质频谱分配。上述算 法虽然满足了车联网的通信需求，但由于仅以系统和速率作为优化目 标，导致信道质量不佳的车辆，面临通信可靠性的损失。因此，将最 大化系统和速率问题转化为最大化-最小传输速率问题，并提出了基 于干扰感知多图的异质频谱共享算法。仿真验证，与经典的基于博弈 论的异质频谱共享算法相比，本文所设计的两种算法更好地保障了车 辆通信链路的可靠性和延时性能要求，保证链路中断概率和数据包延 时溢出概率分别不超过0.001和0.009,其中基于干扰感知多图的异 质频谱共享算法具有更高的可靠性。
二、针对多业务并存车联网中的异质频谱通信链路多样化服务质 量(Quality of Service, QoS)要求问题，提出了基于干扰感知多智能 体深度强化学习的异质频谱共享算法。所设计的算法采用分布式方案, 解决了现有认知车联网频谱共享技术信令开销大、计算复杂度高的问 题。首先，引入了可以表征多业务QoS要求的有效容量模型，构建多 业务QoS保障的异质频谱共享模型。然后，提出了基于干扰感知多 智能体深度强化学习的异质频谱共享算法，考虑到现有深度强化学习 模型在可观测邻居用户数目变化时所面临的状态空间维度变化的问 题，所设计的算法通过具备干扰感知功能的车辆感知其在每个频段所 受的干扰构建状态空间，以表征邻居用户使用的频谱资源、距离等信 息，维持状态空间维度的稳定。仿真验证,在多业务并存的车联网中， 所设计的算法可以保障车辆通信链路的多样化QoS需求，如保证碰 撞避免信息传输业务数据包延时超出10ms的概率低于所要求的0.01, 保证自动驾驶信息传输业务数据包延时超出100 ms的概率低于所要 求的0.05 o
关键词;认知车联网;异质频谱共享;干扰多图;多业务;深度强化学习

RESEARCH ON HETEROGENEOUS SPECTRUM SHARING TECHNOLOGY IN COGNITIVE VEHICULAR NETWORKS

ABSTRACT
With the explosive growth of vehicular service types and the increasing density of urban vehicles, limited spectrum resources have been difficult to meet the needs of diverse communication services for vehicles. To this end, the vehicular network introduces cognitive radio technology to alleviate the shortage of spectrum resources through the sharing of rich spectrum resources. At present, cognitive vehicular network usually focuses on the use of sub-6 GHz with good penetration characteristics. However, the spectrum resources in the sub-6 GHz cannot fully meet the requirements of diverse vehicular services due to the limited available bandwidth. Compared to sub-6 GHz, millimeter-wave with rich bandwidth resources have begun to attract people's attention. However, because of the extremely high path loss and penetration loss of millimeter-wave, it is difficult to form a stable, reliable and long-term communication connection. Therefore, the use of sub-6 GHz and millimeter wave in vehicular network has become an important way to meet the communication needs of vehicular network. It is necessary to study the heterogeneous spectrum sharing technology in the cognitive vehicular network.
This thesis is supported by Chinese Natural Science Foundation Project "Sensing and Utilization of Polarization Resource in a Dense Heterogeneous Wireless Environment" (No. 61571162) and Beijing Natural Science Foundation Project "Research on Dynamic Spatiotemporal Data driven Video Data Understanding based Vehicular Network Resource Allocation" (No. 4202049). This paper studies the heterogeneous spectrum sharing technology in the cognitive vehicular network integrating the sub- 6 GHz and millimeter-Wave, the main contents are as follows:
1. Aiming at the problem of heterogeneous spectrum interference
caused by vehicles using sub-6 GHz and millimeter-wave, an interference multi-graph based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm and an interference-aware multi-graph based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm are proposed. First, a heterogeneous spectrum sharing model is constructed, and the latency constraint of this model is converted into signal-to-interferencc-plus-noise ratio constraints through network calculus theory, thereby reducing the difficulity of the packet latency acquisition. Then, an interference multi-graph based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm is proposed. An interference multi-graph is constructed to quantify heterogeneous spectrum interference among vehicles, and a multi-graph coloring algorithms is designed for heterogeneous spectrum allocation. Since the above algorithm only use the system sum rate as optimization goal, vehicles with poor channel quality are facing a loss of communication reliability. Therefore, the original problem of system sum rate maximization is transfonned into the problem of maximization of the minimum transmission rate, and an interference- aware multi-graph based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm is proposed to improve the communication reliability of vehicles. Simulation shows that compared with the traditional game based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm, the above two algorithms better guarantee the reliability and delay performance requirements, and can protect the coummnuication outage probability and the packt latency outage probabilbity less than 0.0001 and 0.0009, repectively. Moreover, the interference-aware multi-graph based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm can provide better reliability.
2. Aiming at the problem of diverse QoS of vehicular communication links caused by the coexistence of diverse services in the vehicular network, an interference-aware multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based heterogeneous spectrum sharing algorithm is proposed to ensure multiservice QoS requirements. At the same time, the proposed algorithm adopts a distributed scheme, which also solves the problems of high signaling overhead and high computational complexity of the existing spectrum sharing technology in cognitive vehicular network. First, we introduce an effective capacity model and build a multi-service QoS guaranteed
heterogeneous spectrum sharing model. Then, based on the interference- aware multi-agent deep reinforcement learning model, the vehicle as an agent is equipped with cognitive device to autonomously select QoS guaranteed parameter and transmission spectrum to obtain a near-optimal heterogeneous spectrum sharing scheme. The algorithm we designed considers the state space dimension change problem of the existing reinforcement learning model due to the change in the number of observed neighbor vehicles. The vehicle with interference sensing ability can build state space by using the interference it senses in each spectrum resource to maintain the stability of state space dimension. The interference can characterize the spectrum resources, distance, and other information used by neighbor vehicles in state space. Simulation shows that the proposed algorithm can guarantee the diverse QoS requirements of vehicular communication links for different services. It is guaranteed that the probability of collision avoidance information transmission service packet latency exceeding 10 ms is lower than the specified 0.01, and the probability of autonomous driving information transmission service packet latency exceeding 100 ms is lower than the specified 0.05.
KEY WORDS:cognitive vehicular network;heterogeneous spectrum sharing;interference multi-graph;multi-service;deep reinforcement learning
