摘要
说话人聚类用于解决“谁，何时，说话”问题，是语音信号处理 领域中的重要技术。说话人聚类算法主要应用在会议语音记录分类、 语音识别预处理、声音类别检测、说话人识别等诸多研究方向，因 此具有重要的研究意义。此前，说话人聚类算法主要集中在单个说话 人场景下的会议记录，通话记录等简单的语音场景，已取得了良好的 性能表现。然而在复杂的“鸡尾酒会”场景下，多说话人同时说话情况 下(overlap)的说话人聚类问题，到目前为止，依然是当今的说话人 聚类问题的研究难点之一。
本文对说话人聚类方法uis-mn进行研究与改进。Uis-rnn是一种 以全监督方式实现说话人聚类任务的方法，本文对uis-rnn的说话人 转换概率问题提出了改进算法，并提出使用说话人数量估计方法，预 先估计说话人总体数量，改进了 uis-mn的决策方法，增加聚类细分 (resegment)部分，降低聚类的估计误差。最后本文基于uis-mn实 现了 overlap场景下的说话人聚类系统。
在说话人数量估计任务中需要同时满足上述的两个需求：一是估 计非固定长度的语音数据整体的说话人数量，二是检测每一个固定长 度的的短语音片段中同时说话的说话人数量，即overlap检测。因此 本文的另一个贡献是提出了支持变长数据输入的说话人数量估计方 法，基于GST模型结构的说话人数量估计方法。对比目前说话人数 量估计方法，基于CRNN的方法count-net,本文提出的说话人数量 估计方法支持变长数据的输入，在说话人数大于等于5的情况下，本 文的说话入数量估计方法能获得更加准确结果。此外结果表明，本文 提出的基于GST模型结构的说话人数量估计模型在240ms下取得小 于0.2的MAE误差，在变长的语音数据下能够实现小于0.4的平均 MAE误差，证明其对变长语音数据的说话人数量估计结果的有效性。
本文通过实验结果表明，在改进说话人转换概率估计的方法后， 说话人聚类结果有效提升，DER下降2.6%o uis-mn增加resegment 机制后，说话人聚类效果获得明显的提升，DER下降达6%左右，实 现了在非overlap场景下的6.18%的DER结果，baseline系统获得 14.84%的 DERo
此外，本文提出的针对overlap的说话人聚类方法能有效的在 overlap情形下实现说话人的多标签聚类，并在手动合成的overlap语 音数据上获得9.76%的DER0
关键词:说话人聚类;鸡尾酒会;说话人数量估计
RESEARCH AND IMPLEMENTATION OF KEY TECHNOLOGY IN SPEAKER DIARIZATION SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
Speaker diarization is an important technique for voice signal processing to solve the problem of "who, speak, when,". Speaker diarization technology is mainly used in conference speech recording classification, speech recognition pre-processing, voice category detection, speaker recognition and so on, so it has important research significance. Previously, the speaker diarization algorithm mainly focused on nonoverlapping speaker scenes of meeting recording, call recording and other simple voice scenes, has achieved good performance. However, in the complex "cocktail party" scene, the problem of the speaker diarization in the case of multiple speakers speaking at the same time (overlap), is still one of the difficulties in the study of the diarization of speakers today.
This paper proposes an improved algorithm for the speaker change probability of uis-mn, and proposes to use the number of speakers estimation method, improve the decision method of uis-mn, increase the clustering segmentation (resegment) part, and reduce the clustering estimation error . Finally, based on uis-mn, this paper implements the speaker clustering system in the overlap scenario.
In the task of estimating the number of speakers, the above two needs must be met at the same time: first, to estimate the number of speakers of non-fixed-length voice data, and second, to detect each fixed-length short voice fragment in the number of speakers speaking at the same time, i.e. overlap detection. Therefore, another contribution of this paper is to propose a method to estimate the number of speakers to support non-fixed- length voice data input, a method of estimating the number of speakers based on the Structure of the GST model. Compared with the current advanced CRNN method count-net, the input of variable-length data is supported, and a lower MAE value is obtained if the number of speakers is greater than or equal to 5. In addition, the results show that The proposed number of speakers based on the GST model structure has obtained a MAE error of less than 0.2 at 240ms speech length, and the average MAE error of less than 0.4 can be realized under the variable length speech data, which proves the validity of the estimated number of speakers for non-fixed- length voice data.
The experimental results in this paper show that after improving the method of speaker change probability estimation, the speaker diarization results are effectively improved, and DER drops by 2.6%. After uis-mn increased the resegment mechanism, DER dropped by about 6%, achieving a DER result of 6.18% in non-overlap scenarios, and the baseline system obtained 14.84% DER.
In addition, the speaker diarization method proposed in this paper can effectively achieve multi-label clustering of speakers in the case of overlap. Get 9.76% DER on manually synthesized overlap speech data.
KEY WORDS:Speaker Diarization;Cocktail Party;Estimates the Number of Concurrent Speakers
