摘要
随着移动机器人技术的发展，移动机器人广泛应用于各种军事和 民用领域，以无人机为代表的移动机器人组网应用向着大规模和高速 移动的方向发展。提高无线通信质量是大规模快速移动机器人组网需 要解决的关键问题，路由协议和信道接入算法对无线通信性能影响较 大。由于无人机应用规模较大和移动速度较快导致了网络端到端跳数 较大，通信范围内接触时间较短。针对上述问题本文对大规模无人机 网络路由协议和快速移动无人机辅助网络信道接入算法进行研究，旨 在降低网络端到端时延和提高网络吞吐量。
主要的工作和创新点包括以下两点：
首先，本文针对大规模无人机网络端到端跳数较多导致时延较大 的问题，提出了大规模无人机群的模糊决策树路由协议（FDT）。在 FDT中，通过模糊决策树预测跳数，先选出邻居节点中跳数最小的部 分邻居集，再通过指数加权平均从邻居最小跳数集合中选出时延和传 输成功率综合性能最优的下一跳节点，达到减少跳数并保证较高传输 成功率的目的。仿真结果表明FDT相对于算法RFLQGeo、MLProph、 DOA丄BR,在端到端时延上分别降低了 72.1%、76.6%、74.5%、22.1%, 但是在传输成功率性能上还有待提高。
其次，本文为了增大快速移动无人机辅助网络通信接触时间，解 决网络吞吐量较低的问题，提出了支持快速移动无人机辅助网络的度 量学习信道接入算法（ML）。在ML中采用度量学习优化无人机基站 飞行轨迹，保证无人机基站在高速飞行情况下与地面设备有充足的接 触时间完成数据收集，在信道接入机制上采用图着色方法降低接入冲 突。仿真结果表明ML相较于对比算法DLMA、iQRA、QLeaner、 SLA,在吞吐量性能上分别提高了 38.18%、46.24%、49.15%、26.76%, 并在传输成功率上也有很好的表现，但是本文提出的算法ML在时延 和能耗上具有局限性。
本文的研究工作可以为后来学者研究大规模无人机网络和快速 移动无人机辅助网络提供参考。
关键词:移动机器人群;模糊决策树;度量学习;端到端时延;吞吐量
RESEARCH ON KEY TECHNOLOGIES OF MACHINE LEARNING NETWORKING FOR LARGE SCALE AND FAST MOVING ROBOT GROUPS
ABSTRACT
With the development of mobile robot technology, mobile robot technology is widely used in various military and civil fields. The networking applications of mobile robot represented by UAV are developing towards the direction of large-scale and high-speed movement. Improving the quality of wireless communication is one of critical problems to be solved in large-scale fast mobile robot networking. Routing protocol and channel access algorithm have great impacts on the performance of wireless communication. Due to the large application scale and fast moving speed ofUA\^ the networks end-to-end hops are large and the contact time in the communication range is short. In view of the above problems, this thesis studies the large-scale UAV network routing protocol and fast mobile UAV-aided network channel access algorithm, in order to reduce the network end-to-end delay and improve the network throughput.
The main work and innovations include the following two points:
Firstly, in order to solve the problem of long end-to-end hops in large- scale UAV network, a fuzzy decision tree routing protocol (FDT) is proposed. In FDT, the number of hops is predicted by fuzzy decision tree, and the next hop node with the best comprehensive performance of delay and transmission success rate is selected from the minimum hop set of neighbors by exponential weighted average, so as to reduce the number of hops and ensure a higher transmission success rate. The simulation results show that the end-to-end delay of FDT is 72.1%, 76.6%, 74.5%, 22.1% lower than that of RFLQGeo, MLProph, DOA and LBR, respectively. However, the transmission success rate of FDT needs to be improved.
Secondly, in order to increase the communication contact time and solve the problem of low network throughput, a metric learning (ML) in
channel access algorithm is proposed. In ML, metric learning is used to optimize the flight trajectory of UAV base station to ensure that UAV base station has contact time with ground equipment enough to complete data collection in high-speed flight. Graph coloring method is used to reduce access conflict in channel access mechanism. The simulation results show that the throughput performance of ML is 3&18%, 46.24%, 49.15% and 26.76% higher than that of DLMA, iQRA, QLeaner and SLA, and the transmission success rate is also very good. However, the ML algorithm proposed in this thesis has limitations in delay and energy consumption.
The research work of this thesis can provide reference for later scholars to study large-scale UAV network and fast mobile UAV-aided network.
KEY WORDS:Mobile robot swarm;Fuzzy decision tree;Metric learning;End-to-end delay;Throughput
