摘要
随着低轨通信卫星的不断发展，世界范围内正掀起利用低轨卫星 建设卫星互联网星座的热潮。One Web > SpaceX、Telesat和Kepler等 许多商业航天公司都加入了部署低轨卫星互联网星座的阵营，期望提 供全球化的宽带服务。低轨卫星系统可以大幅减小通信延时和电波传 输损耗，系统性能也将更加稳定，但低轨卫星使用的Ku、Ka等频段 也被在轨的静止轨道(GeostationaryOrbit, GSO)卫星大量使用，容 易形成系统间干扰。随着低轨卫星互联网星座的大量部署，其与GSO 卫星系统间的频率兼容问题将日益突出。
本文首先分析了卫星系统间同频干扰的关键研究点，包括同频干 扰的引发、场景建模的关键因素、干扰评价指标及计算，以及干扰的 统计和分析。其次，提出了联合禁区与自适应波束控制的下行干扰减 缓方法，包括对NGSO卫星禁区进行定义和数学建模、提出卫星波束 的重叠判定准则、设计与禁区模型匹配的自适应波束控制方法、利用 MATLAB和卫星工具箱(Satellite Tool Kit, STK)的联合编程技术对 干扰减缓方法的有效性进行验证。再次，提出了基于自适应分隔角的 上行干扰减缓方法，包括自适应分隔角的策略设计、以One Web和 SINOSAT-5系统为例进行软件仿真、从多个维度讨论分析干扰的特性, 并验证上行干扰减缓技术的有效性。结果表明，所提出的联合禁区与 自适应波束控制的下行干扰减缓方法以及基于自适应分隔角策略的 上行干扰减缓方法可以有效降低GSO卫星和地球站接收端的I/N值、 干扰频次、干扰概率以及通信链路的C/(N+I)恶化，能够用于NGSO 卫星系统对GSO卫星系统的保护。本文的研究结果可作为卫星系统 间频率兼容研究的理论依据和技术支撑。
关键词:低轨卫星星座;干扰减缓;禁区;波束控制;自适应分隔角
RESEARCH ON FREQUENCY COMPATIBILITY AND COEXISTENCE BETWEEN LOW EARTH ORBIT SATELLITE INTERNET CONSTELLATION AND GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
With the continuous development of low earth orbit communication satellites, the construction of satellite Internet constellation by low earth orbit satellites is on the upsurge all over the world. Commercial aerospace companies such as OneWeb, SpaceX, Telesat and Kepler are developing their own Internet constellations in the hope of providing global broadband services・ Low earth orbit satellite systems can greatly reduce communication delay and radio transmission loss, and the system performance will be more stable. However, frequency bands such as Ku and Ka et.al. used by low earth orbit satellite are also widely used by Geostationary Orbit (GSO) satellites, which are prone to inter-system interferences. With the deployment of Internet constellation in low orbit, the frequency compatibility problem with GSO satellite systems will become more and more serious.
This paper first analyzes key research points of co-frequency interference between satellite systems, including causes of co-frequency interference, key factors of scene modeling, evaluation indicator and calculation of interference, as well as statistics and analysis of interference. Secondly® downlink interference mitigation method between satellite systems is proposed, including the definition and mathematical modeling of the NGSO satellite exclusion zone, proposing the overlap criterion of satellite beams, designing the adaptive beam control method matching exclusion zone, and using MATLAB and Satellite Tool Kit(STK) joint programming techniques to verify the effectiveness of the method・ Thirdly, a uplink interference mitigation method between satellite systems is proposed, including the strategy design of dynamic separation angle, software simulation with OneWeb and SinoSat-5 systems as examples, discussion of simulation results from multiple dimensions, and verification of effectiveness of the uplink interference mitigation technology. The results show that the proposed downlink interference mitigation method joint exclusion zone and adaptive beam control, and uplink interference mitigation method based on the strategy of adaptive separation angle can effectively reduce the I/N value, interference frequency, interference probability, as well as the communication link C/(N + 1) degradation at the GSO satellite and earth station receiver. The proposed methods can be used to protect GSO satellite system from NGSO satellite system.
KEY WORDS:NGSO constellation;interference mitigation;exclusion zone;beam control;adaptive separation angle
