摘要
随着万物互联、智慧城市等新兴概念和产业的不断提出和发展， 位置服务在人们日常生产生活中的作用逐渐凸显。当前城市环境复杂 多样，尤其是在室内区域，信号在传输过程中容易受到多径、非视距 等因素的影响，导致定位性能的下降。且联合多基站定位的方法存在 基站节点部署成本较高、定位条件较为严苛等不足。5G网络商业化进 程逐步成熟，相关技术的研究与应用给单基站定位的实现提供了条 件。因此，本文结合5G组网技术特点，探究了以大规模天线阵列为代 表的5G技术对角度和时延估计能力的提升，为实现室内外复杂环境 下定位服务提供新的解决方案。
根据单基站定位过程中定位精度的主要影响因素，本文的研究工 作主要分为以下三个部分：
一、	本文首先分析了5G组网技术的主要特点，超密集组网技术使 得基站的覆盖能力得到提升，大规模天线技术提升了角度和时延的估 计能力，并结合毫米波实现了高密度的波束成形，这为单基站定位的 实现奠定了基础。同时分析了几种常见的基于移动通信网的定位技 术，说明单基站定位的优势，并分析了单基站定位原理和影响单基站 定位精度的主要因素，为接下来的研究确定了解决问题的思路。
二、	针对单基站定位过程中存在远近场问题，传统的远近场角度 时延估计算法存在参数匹配和需要不断频谱搜索的不足，本文结合大 规模天线下的阵列时域和频域接收模型，提岀了一种基于混合阶的远 近场角度时延估计方法，该方法融合了MUSIC和ESPRIT的优点，在 减少搜索次数和不需参数匹配的情况下，完成了高精度角度时延联合 估计。更重要的是，通过对频域接收信号的引入，实现了远场模型下 的时延估计，为无缝高精度定位提供了有力的数据支撑。
三、	针对单基站定位过程中，存在非视距基站干扰等问题，本文 结合5G波束播发特点，提出了一种新的5G定位架构，在空旷区域利 用波束指向性的特点完成视距基站的初选。复杂环境下，非视距多径 干扰较多，考虑到只利用波束无法完成基站选取，因此本文结合惯性 导航提供的数据约束能力，提出一种PDR约束的非视距路径判断方 法，并在最终位置解算阶段，引入了虚拟基站的概念，在多条路径多 次反射的情况下，利用多径冗余信息融合PDR提出一种二次加权的位 置估计方法。
通过对5G网络下单基站定位优势的分析与判断，本文提岀的单 基站定位方法具备较高的定位精度，尤其是在恶劣环境中能够抵抗一 定的NLOS误差，这为未来单基站定位算法的研究提供了一些思路与 方法。
关键词:MIMO;单基站;角度时延估计;远近场;非视距定位
RESEARCH ON AOA TOA ESTIMATION AND SINGLE BASE STATION LOCALIZATION ALGORITHM BASED ON 5G MIMO
ABSTRACT
With the development of new concepts and industries such as Internet of Everything and Smart City, location services are becoming more and more significant in people's daily life. How to achieve high-precision location services has been a hot spot for research. The current urban environment is complex and diverse, especially in indoor areas, where the signal is easily affected by multipath and non-sight distance factors in the transmission process, leading to the decrease of positioning performance. At present, the joint multi-base station positioning method suffers from high deployment cost of base station. 5G network commercialization is gradually maturing, and the research of related technologies provide conditions for the implementation of single-base station positioning. Therefore, this paper explores the improvement of angle and delay estimation capability of 5G technology represented by large-scale antenna array in combination with the characteristics of 5G networking technology, and provides new solutions for the realization of positioning services in complex indoor and outdoor environments.
According to the main influencing factors of positioning accuracy in the process of single base station positioning, the work of this paper is organized into the following main areas of research.
1. This paper analyzes the main features of 5G networking technology. The ultra-dense networking technology makes the coverage capability of base stations improved, the large-scale antenna technology improves the estimation capability of angle and delay, and combines with millimeter wave to realize high-density beamforming, which lays the foundation for the realization of single base station positioning. Several common positioning techniques based on mobile communication networks are also analyzed to illustrate the advantages of single-base station positioning, the principle of single-base station positioning and the main factors affecting the accuracy of single-base station positioning are analyzed to identify the problem-solving ideas for the next research.
2. To address the far and near field problems in single base station positioning, the traditional far and near field angular time delay estimation algorithm suffers from the deficiencies of parameter matching and the need for constant spectrum search. The method, in this paper, integrates the advantages ofMUSIC and ESPRIT, and accomplishes the joint estimation of high-precision angular time delay with less search times and no parameter matching. More importantly, by introducing the frequency domain received signal, the time delay estimation under the far-field model is achieved, which provides a strong data support for seamless high- precision positioning.
3. To address the problems such as interference from non-visible base stations in the process of single base station positioning, this paper proposes a new 5G positioning architecture by combining the characteristics of 5G beams, and completes the primary selection of visible base stations in open areas by using the characteristics of beam directivity. In complex environments with more non-line-of-sight multipath interference, this paper proposes a PDR-constrained non-line-of-sight path determination method. Finally, in the final position solution stage, the concept of virtual base station is introduced, and a quadratic weighted position estimation method is proposed using multipath redundant information fiised with PDR in the case of multiple reflections of multiple paths.
Through the analysis and judgment of the advantages of single base station positioning in 5G network, the single base station positioning method proposed in this paper has high positioning accuracy, especially in harsh environments, which provides some ideas and methods for the fiiture research of single base station positioning algorithms.
KEY WORDS:MIMO;Single Base Station;AOA and TOA;Far and Near Field;Non-Line-of-Sight Positioning

