摘要
随着移动互联网的快速发展，人们对移动通信技术的要求越来越 高。车联网作为移动互联网的一部分，随着人们对安全需求和多媒体 通信需求越来越强烈，人们对车辆通信的质量要求也在不断提高。
针对车辆通信这种在高速环境下无线通信的常见应用，当前对其 无线通信技术的研究主要集中在LTE和IEEE 802.11p上。LTE作为 准4G无线通信技术标准，其引入了 OFDM和MIMO等关键技术， 显著增加了数据传输速率，并支持多种带宽分配，频谱配置灵活，支 持高移动性和低时延。802.lip从802.11a扩充修改而来，其保护间隔 增加了一倍，采用64点的OFDM技术，増强了车载环境下抵抗多径 传播和多普勒效应的能力。
不管是LTE还是IEEE 802.11p,其物理层均采用了 OFDM技术。 OFDM作为一种频率复用技术，在现代无线通信恶劣的环境及有限频 谱资源的情况下凭借其较好的抗衰落、抗干扰能力以及较高的频谱利 用率，己经成为高速数据传输系统的关键技术。由于OFDM的子载 波相互正交，因此对于频率偏差十分敏感，通信系统收发两端的频率 偏移，尤其是高速移动导致的多普勒频移，都会使得OFDM子载波 之间的正交性遭到破坏，形成子载波间干扰ICL使解调性能迅速恶 化。因此同步技术成为车辆通信高速环境下的关键技术。
针对这样的情况，论文从以下方面对这个问题进行了研究：论文 首先介绍了车辆通信中常用的两种技术LTE和802.11p的物理层结构 以及他们共同采用的OFDM技术的基本原理；其次调研分析了无线 环境下OFDM技术的同步研究，主要是对数据辅助的同步算法进行 了理解与分析；然后在研究已有的同步算法的基础上，根据LTE的 帧结构特点，给出了 LTE下一种基于主同步序列和参考信号联合估 计频率偏移的频率同步算法,并进行了仿真验证。对于车辆通信 802.1 Ip协议，我们对采用的载波频率同步算法和相位跟踪算法进行 了 FPGA的硬件实现，并对算法的硬件实现通过视频传输进行了相应 的验证。
关键词： 车辆通信LTE 802.1 Ip频率同步FPGA
RESEARCH ON SYNCHRONIZATION TECHNIQUE
FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
IN HIGH SPEED ENVIRONMENT
ABSTRACT
With the rapid development of mobile Internet, people's requirements on mobile communication is increasingly high. As a part of mobile Internet, vehicular networking flourishes. Along with the people's security needs and multimedia communications needs become more and more intense, people's quality requirements to vehicle communications are also constantly improving.
According to vehicle communication, which is the common application of high speed wireless communications, the current study on its wireless communication technology mainly focus on the LTE and IEEE 802.1 Ip. As a quasi 4G wireless communication technology, which introduce the key technology of OFDM and MIMO, increases significantly the rate of data transmission and supports a variety of bandwidth allocation, high mobility and low delay. 802.1 Ip is extended and modified from 802.1 la, doubling its guard interval and using 64 point OFDM technology, enhance the ability to resist the multipath propagation and Doppler effect in the automotive environment.
Whether LTE or IEEE 802.1 Ip, OFDM technology is used in their physical layer. As a frequency reuse technology, OFDM has become a key technology of high speed data transmission system depends on its good anti fading and anti interference capability and high spectrum utilization in bad wireless communication environment and the limited spectrum resources situation. Because the subcarriers are orthogonal to each other, OFDM is very sensitive to frequency offset. Frequency offset between the transmitter and receiver, especially the Doppler frequency shift in high speed mobile environment will make the orthogonality between OFDM subcarriers destroyed, forming ICI and making demodulation performance deteriorated rapidly. So synchronization technology has become the key technology of vehicle communication in high speed environment.
In view of this situation, this paper has conducted the research to this problem from the following aspects: Firstly this paper introduces the physical layer structure of LTE and 802.1 Ip and the basic principle of OFDM, which is used in common; Secondly I investigate and analyse the
in
synchronization of OFDM technology in wireless environment, mainly on the data aided synchronization algorithm; Thirdly based on the research of existing synchronization algorithm and according to the frame structure and characteristics of LTE, I put forward a joint estimation algorithm of frequency offset of LTE based on primary synchronization sequence and reference signal and verify with simulation. Finally the algoritiim we use on carrier frequency synchronization and phase tracking is implemented on FPGA hardware, and the hardware implementation of the algorithm is verified by the video transmission for the 802.lip protocol under the vehicle communication.
KEY WORDS： vehicle communication LTE 802.lip frequency synchronization FPGA
IV
