摘要
近年来，随着信息技术的不断发展，智能驾驶汽车、无人机等新 兴智能平台也日趋复杂，系统对雷达功能和无线通信功能的要求也越 来越高。为了解决未来通信网络业务增长带来的频谱资源稀缺问题， 亟需设计一种融合信号在实现雷达探测功能的同时又能够进行通信 信息的传递。本文围绕基于OFDM信号的雷达通信一体化关键技术 对短距离和远距离目标场景的波形设计以及雷达接收机处理方法等 方面展开研究并提出了有效的解决方案。主要贡献包括两部分：
(1) 本文首先进行了短距离目标场景下的雷达通信一体化方案设 计。面向智能驾驶场景，现有的基于OFDM的一体化波形使用一部 分子载波传输导频信号用于雷达探测，另一部分子载波做通信数据传 输。针对导频子载波的大量插入导致的频谱效率不高的问题，提出了 一种基于OFDM导频和索引调制的一体化波形设计方案IMP-OFDM, 用于在短距离目标场景下进行雷达探测。该方案在保证雷达性能的同 时提升了数据传输速率和频谱资源利用率。为保证雷达估计精度，提 出了基于脉冲压缩的目标检测方法并结合二维傅里叶变换对目标进 行速度和距离的估计，能达到0.1m的距离分辨率和0.58m/s的速度 分辨率。最后分析了在IMP-OFDM方案下雷达和通信性能的制约关 系，该方案能够在合理的参数设置下同时提升雷达和通信性能。
(2) 本文还对远距离目标场景进行了雷达通信一体化方案设计。 IMP-OFDM方案下雷达能够探测的最大无模糊距离由于受到导频个 数的限制只适用于探测短距离的目标。因此，本文还针对远距离目标 探测场景设计了按脉冲分组进行索引调制的PIMP-OFDM雷达通信 一体化波形。接收端对导频矩阵进行脉冲压缩之后进行重构实现对目 标速度和距离的测量。该方案相比于步进型导频的一体化波形方案能 够减弱由于目标运动对目标距离测量带来的影响并且可以额外传输 一部分数据比特。
关键词:雷达通信一体化;OFDM;导频;索引调制

INTEGRATED WAVEFORM DESIGN OF RADAR AND COMMUNICATIONS BASED ON OFDM
ABSTRACT
In recent years, with the continuous development of information technology, intelligent driving cars, unmanned aerial vehicle and other emerging intelligent platforms have become increasingly complex, and the system has increasingly higher requirements for radar functions and wireless communication functions. Therefore, designing a signal that can not only detect targets but also transmit communication information is needed urgently. This thesis focuses on the key technology of integrated radar and communications based on OFDM signal, and proposes effective solutions on the waveform design of short and long distance target scenes and radar receiver processing methods. The main contribution consists of two parts:
(1) Firstly, this thesis designs an integrated radar and communications scheme under short-range target scenarios. For smart driving scenarios, in view of the existing OFDM-based integrated waveforms, some subcarriers are used for radar detection, and the rest are used for communication data transmission. Aiming to the low spectrum efficiency due to a number of pilots a joint radar and communications waveform based on OFDM and index modulation is proposed. The integrated waveform design scheme IMP-OFDM can be used in detecting short-di stance target scenes. In order to ensure the accuracy of radar estimation, a multi-target detection method based on pulse compression and two-dimensional Fourier transform is proposed, which can reach the range resolution of 0.1m and the velocity resolution of 0.58m/s. The relationship between radar and communications performance under the proposed IMP-OFDM is analyzed. This scheme can improve both radar and communications performance at the same time under reasonable parameter settings.
(2) This thesis also designs an integrated radar and communications scheme for long-distance target scenarios. The maximum unambiguous range that the radar can detect under the IMP-OFDM scheme is only suitable for detecting short-range targets due to the limitation of the number of pilots. Therefore, this thesis proposes a PIMP-OFDM radar and communications integrated waveform that is index modulated by pulse groups for long-distance target detection scenarios. The receiving end performs pulse compression and reconstructs on the pilot matrix to achieve the target velocity and range measurement. Compared with the integrated waveform solution based on stepped pilots, this scheme can reduce the impact of target movement on target range measurement, eliminate undesired peaks and transmit a portion of data bits additionally.

KEY WORDS:joint radar and communications;OFDM;pilot;index modulation

