摘要
行为感知是机器分析和理解人或者动物等对象行为特征的方法。 基于Wi-Fi信道状态信息(Channel State Information, CSI)的行为感 知技术具有低成本、覆盖广等优势，得到了广泛关注。然而基于WiFi 的行为感知受信道带宽、环境条件等因素的影响，存在着感知精度 不高的问题。
本文针对商用Wi-Fi设备在行为感知中的局限性，以聚合带宽和 多设备协作为例分别展开研究，旨在提升基于Wi-Fi的行为感知系统 的精度。
针对Wi-Fi信道带宽有限导致感知分辨率不足的问题，本文提出 一种基于Wi-Fi的行为感知分辨率提升机制。通过多Wi-Fi信道快速 切换机制在极短的时间间隔内从多个相邻Wi-Fi信道中采集CSI,并 通过相邻Wi-Fi信道聚合机制获得聚合信道的CSI,把Wi-Fi信道的 带宽扩展为可切换信道的全部带宽；构建“时域-频域-空间域”的特 征提取模块，完成对聚合CSI的特征提取。实验结果证明，使用了所 提岀的分辨率提升机制后，行为识别准确性从88.6%提升至96.4%, 有效提高感知分辨率。
针对环境条件变化影响感知精度的问题，本文面向多Wi-Fi设备 协作场景，提岀一种最佳感知链路动态智能选择机制。将Wi-Fi链路 选择制定为一个顺序决策问题，构建了一个深度强化学习智能体，采 用强化学习对问题进行求解。根据Wi-Fi环境和对象的动态变化，智 能化地对多条链路进行权重排序，并由智能体选取最能表征该区域中 目标姿态、活动和位置等情景信息的链路。根据该链路的CSI构建无 线信号与对应区域内目标状态的关系模型。实验结果证明，在多WiFi 设备协作下，该机制仅需使用一条Wi-Fi链路就可以达到多条链路 的近似性能。
关键词:Wi-Fi信道状态信息;行为感知;精度提升;信道切换和聚合;最优链路选择
RESEARCH ON PRECISION IMPROVEMENT TECHNOLOGY OF WI-FI -BASED BEHAVIOR SENSING SYSTEM
ABSTRACT
Behavior sensing is a method for machines to analyze and understand the behavioral characteristics of objects such as humans or animals. Behavior sensing technology based on Wi-Fi Channel State Information (CSI) has gained widespread attention because of its advantages of low cost and wide coverage. However, Wi-Fi-based behavior sensing is affected by the channel bandwidth, environmental conditions and other factors, and has the problem of low sensing accuracy.
In this paper, we address the limitations of commodity Wi-Fi devices in behavior sensing, and investigate aggregated bandwidth and multidevice collaboration as examples, aiming to improve the accuracy of WiFi-based behavior sensing systems, respectively.
To solve the problem of insufficient sensing resolution due to the limited bandwidth of Wi-Fi channel, this paper proposes a mechanism to improve the sensing resolution of behavior based on Wi-Fi. The CSI is collected from several adjacent Wi-Fi channels in a very short time interval by the fast switching mechanism of multiple Wi-Fi channels, and the CSI of the aggregated channel is obtained by the aggregation mechanism of adjacent Wi-Fi channels, and the bandwidth of the Wi-Fi channel is extended to the full bandwidth of the switchable channel. The feature extraction module of "time-frequency-spatial domain" is constructed to complete the feature extraction of aggregated CSI. The experimental results show that the accuracy of behavior recognition is improved from 88.6% to 96.4% by using the proposed resolution improvement mechanism, which effectively improves the sensing resolution.
To address the problem of changing environmental conditions affecting sensing precision, this paper proposes an optimal sensing link dynamic intelligent selection mechanism for multi-Wi-Fi device collaboration scenarios. Formulating Wi-Fi link selection as a sequential decision problem, a deep reinforcement learning agent is constructed, and reinforcement learning is used to solve the problem. Multiple links are intelligently weighted and ranked according to the dynamics of the Wi-Fi environment and objects, and the link that best characterizes situational information such as target pose, activity and location in the region is selected by the agent. The relationship model between the wireless signal and the state of the target in the corresponding region is constructed based on the CSI of this link. The experimental results demonstrate that the mechanism can achieve the approximate performance of multiple links with the collaboration of multiple Wi-Fi devices using only one Wi-Fi link.
KEY WORDS:Wi-Fi CSI;behavior sensing;precision improvement;channel switching and aggregation;optimal link selection
