摘要
正交时频空(OTFS)有望解决未来无线通信中高速移动场景的通 信问题。但是OTFS信道矩阵太大，加之其实际应用时会存在符号间 干扰和子载波间干扰，使得OTFS的信号解调成为一个挑战。已有许 多针对OTFS解调的研究。OTFS信号的解调由信道估计和信号检测组 成。OTFS的信道估计通常采用冲激函数作为导频，使用基于阈值的方 法直接估计信道，可能导致较高的均方误差(MSE)；在OTFS信号检测 中，常用的线性检测算法会进行矩阵求逆运算，时间复杂度和空间复 杂度大并且检测性能也不佳，非线性检测如消息传递(MP)算法也存在 复杂度太大的问题。
深度学习最近几年在通信中的应用越来越广泛。研究表明，深度 学习可以表现出不弱于传统方法的性能，并且具有更快的执行速率， 这为OTFS解调提供了一种新思路。本文使用深度学习方法对OTFS的 信道估计和信号检测进行优化。在信道估计部分，通过分析借鉴己有 的用于信道估计的深度学习方法，我们引入了图像处理中的图像恢复 (IR)网络对二维信道图像进行优化，根据OTFS信道特点简化去噪卷 积神经网络(DnCNN),并将其作为IR网络，仿真表明，使用简化后的 DnCNN可以获得比传统方法更低的MSE,从而降低系统整体的误比特 率(BER)。在信号检测部分，我们分析了传统线性检测方法的实现， 提出了一个简化的线性检测器，可以实现在一定性能损失下极大降低 所消耗的存储空间和需要的运算复杂度。接着我们研究了己有的适用 于大规模多输入多输出(MIMO)的信号检测网络，通过分析OTFS信号 的特点，设计了适合OTFS的基于深度学习的信号检测网络。通过对 比仿真，验证了所提出的信号检测网络比已有的信号检测网络性能更 佳，并且与MP算法相比，极大减少了运行时间，实现了复杂度与解 调性能的良好折衷。
关键词:正交时频空;深度学习;信道估计;信号检测
RESEARCH ON TECHNOLOGY OF DEEP LEARNING BASED OTFS SIGNAL DEMODULATION
ABSTRACT
Orthogonal Time Frequency Space (OTFS) is expected to solve the problems in communication in high-speed mobile scenarios in future wireless communications. However, the size of channel matrix in the OTFS system is too large and there will be inter-symbol interference and intersubcarrier interference, making OTFS signal demodulation a challenge. There have been many studies on OTFS demodulation. The demodulation of OTFS signal consists of channel estimation and signal detection. In OTFS system, an impulse function is usually used as the pilot and the channel estimation is done directly through a threshold-based method, which may lead to higher mean square error (MSE). For signal detection, the linear detection algorithms will need matrix inversion operations, which cost much time and storage and its performance is also undesirable. Non-linear detection algorithms like message passing (MP) algorithm also has the disadvantage of complexity.
In recent years, deep learning has been widely used in communication system. Studies have proved that deep learning can show better performance than traditional methods in some way with a faster execution rate, which brings a new idea for OTFS demodulation. This paper uses deep learning methods to optimize the channel estimation and signal detection for OTFS system. In the channel estimation part, by analyzing and drawing on the existing deep learning methods for channel estimation, we introduce the image restoration (IR) network in image processing to optimize the two-dimensional channel image, and simplify the denoising convolutional neural network (DnCNN) according to the characteristics of the channel and then use it as the IR network. Simulations show that using the simplified DnCNN can achieve a lower MSE than the traditional method and reduce the overall bit error rate (BER) of the system. In the signal detection part, we analyze the implementation of traditional linear detection methods and propose a simplified linear detector that can greatly reduce the storage consumption and time consumption. Then we studied the existing signal detection network suitable for large-scale multiple input multiple output (MIMO) system. By analyzing the characteristics of the signals in OTFS system, we designed a deep learning based signal detection network suitable for OTFS systrm. Through comparison and simulation, it is verified that the proposed signal detection network has better performance than the existing signal detection network. Compared with the MP algorithm, it greatly reduces the total running time and achieves a good compromise between complexity and performance.
KEY WORDS: OTFS;Deep Learning;Channel Estimation;Signal Detection
