摘要
在石油生产过程中，抽油机井的工作环境十分复杂，不但受到抽 油机、杆、泵这些机器配件的综合因素影响，还受到井内各类的物理 环境因素的影响，使得抽油机的故障种类较多且难以检测。通过示功 图分析法来判断抽油机故障，快速定位故障成因，一直以来是抽油机 故障诊断的主要方法。然而传统的示功图分类识别方法依赖人工经验 特征建模，需要较强的先验知识。本文基于深度学习的特征提取与学 习能力，提出了自学习示功图特征分类识别的思路，通过学习示功图 的隐含特征，实现示功图分类识别，并对模型进行轻量化改进，通过 强化学习的方式增强了模型的鲁棒性，使得示功图识别模型实际在嵌 入式设备上移植应用成为可能。本文的具体工作及创新包括：
首先对示功图传统特征工程方法进行了总结，设计了相应的特征 提取与特征融合方法。利用OpenCV进行示功图复杂特征的提取，在 特征的选取上除了选用在图像识别非常有效的图像矩特征，还用位移 载荷的工程参数来弥补图像矩的全局局限性。采用特征融合的方法对 特征进行处理，提高了示功图识别准确率，通过分类对比验证了基于 融合特征识别示功图方法的有效性。
其次为了解决示功图识别在深度学习中存在的小样本问题，设计 了自编码器来进行样本增强，构建了本文的示功图数据集。在此数据 集的基础上，通过借鉴经典网络结构思路，设计实验对比分析了各项 模型参数对模型识别率和收敛性的影响，设计出适用于示功图分类识 别的网络模型，还提出了基于自编码器编码层的参数初始化方法提升 了模型的收敛性能。
最后针对示功图识别的深度学习方法在边缘端嵌入式设备上的 实际应用，提出了模型的轻量化和强化学习方案。利用的MobileNet 网络的思路，对构建的模型进行卷积层分解，降低参数量和计算量， 并设计以Actor-Critic强化学习策略为核心的嵌入式设备的强化学习 方案，保留训练知识的情况下对新知识进行学习以微调模型，并给出 了参数调整的性能对比，以适配不同的实际需求。
关键词:示功图;样本增强;特征融合;卷积神经网络轻量化
RESEARCH ON DIAGNOSIS TECHNOLOGY OF INDICATOR DIAGRAM BASED ON DEEP LEARNING
ABSTRACT
The working environment of pumping well is very complex in the production process. It is not only affected by the comprehensive factors of pumping unit, rod and pump, but also by various physical and environmental factors in the well, which makes the fault types of pumping units more and difficult to detect. It is the main method of fault diagnosis for pumping unit to judge the fault and locate the cause of the fault quickly by the method of diagram analysis. However, the traditional classification and recognition methods of indicator diagram use the artificial experience features, and need strong prior knowledge. Based on the strong feature extraction and learning ability of deep learning, this paper proposes the idea of self-learning indicator feature classification recognition. Through learning the local characteristics of the indicator map, the paper designs the adaptive network to realize the classification and recognition of the indicator diagram, and makes the model lightweight improved, and the robustness of the model is enhanced by the way of enhanced learning, which makes the method actually be on the embedded equipment Migration of applications becomes possible. The specific work and innovation of this paper include:
Firstly, the traditional complex features of indicator diagram are analyzed and summarized, and the corresponding feature extraction and feature fusion methods are designed. Opencv is used to extract complex features of power graph. In addition to the image recognition, the most effective moment feature is identified, and the engineering parameters of displacement load are used to make up for the global limitation of image moment. The feature fusion method is used to process the features, which improves the accuracy of the indicator recognition. The effectiveness of the method is verified by classification and comparison.
Secondly, in order to solve the problem of small sample in deep learning of indicator recognition, a self encoder is designed to enhance the sample, and the data set of the indicator map is constructed. Based on the data set, the paper compares and analyzes the influence of various model parameters on the model recognition rate and convergence by using the classical network structure thinking, and designs the network model suitable for the classification and identification of indicator map. The algorithm of self encoder coding layer is also proposed to improve the convergence performance of the model.
Finally, aiming at the practical application of deep learning method of indicator recognition in embedded equipment at edge end, the lightweight and reinforcement learning scheme of the model is proposed. The paper uses mobileNet network to decompose the model in volume layer, reduce the parameter and calculation amount, and design the intensive learning scheme of embedded equipment with actor critical reinforcement learning strategy as the core. The new knowledge is studied to fine tune the model with the training knowledge reserved. The performance comparison of parameter adjustment is given to adapt to different actual needs.
KEY WORDS:indicator diagram;sample enhancement;feature fusion;convolutional neural network lightweight
