摘要
语音增强技术的目的是净化被干扰源破坏了的带噪语音，恢复出 干净的说话人信号，在此过程中保证语音信号的质量和可懂度是本领 域学者不懈追求的目标。目前基于数字信号处理技术的传统语音增强 算法在周围环境变得恶劣或者不再满足设定条件时，会产生严重的噪 声残留或者语音失真致使听力设备无法工作。为了解决上述问题，近 年来基于深度学习的语音增强算法开始兴起，能够在极低信噪比和复 杂背景下恢复出干净语音，取得了令人瞩目的成绩。其中，卷积神经 网络能在保证去噪效果的前提下大幅减少模型的参数量，得到了研究 人员的广泛关注。然而，卷积运算的感受域有限，很难对全局语境进 行建模，这限制了模型进一步提升的空间，不利于增强语音的恢复。
为了解决上述问题，本文主要研究通过注意力机制提高卷积网络 获取全局语境的能力，进一步提升语音增强的性能。本文先是提出了 一种用于单通道语音增强的注意力强化全卷积神经网络AAUNet,将 一种二维相对自注意机制应用到全卷积网络中，具体做法是将卷积运 算与注意力机制产生的输出在通道方向拼接起来生成新的特征图，通 过调整注意力通道所占的比例，可以在卷积关注局部细节和自注意力 获取全局语境之间找到最优组合。实验结果表明，AAUNet在多种未 知噪声和信噪比条件下超越了所有对比方法，提高了模型的去噪能力。
然而，本文在实验中发现，当注意力机制的通道数占比为100% 时，模型的语音增强性能出现了下降，针对这一问题，本文又提出了 一种基于独立自注意机制的语音增强模型SAUNeto独立自注意机制 可以自由设置运算区域的大小，通过多值矩阵提升基于距离的感知能 力。实验结果表明，SAUNet相比于AAUNet需要的参数量更少，且 在PESQ和STOI评估指标上分别提高了 7.93%和4.16%,对语音质 量、可懂度和未知噪声抑制等方面的性能提升更加显著。
关键词:语音增强;全卷积神经网络;注意力机制
RESEARCH ON SPEECH ENHANCEMENT ALGORITHM BASED ON ATTENTION Fusion CONVOLUTIONAL
NEURAL NETWORK
ABSTRACT
The purpose of speech enhancement technology is to purify the noisy speech destroyed by the interference source and restore the speaker's signal. In this process, enhancing the quality and intelligibility of speech is the unswerving goal of scholars in this field. At present, the traditional speech enhancement algorithms based on digital signal processing technology will produce serious noise residue or speech distortion and make the device unable to work when the surrounding environment becomes bad or no longer meets the set conditions. To solve the above problems, speech enhancement algorithms based on deep learning are emerging rapidly in recent years. They can recover clean speech in extremely low signal-to- noise ratio (SNR) and complex background environments, and have made remarkable achievements. Among them, convolutional neural network can greatly reduce the number of network parameters on the premise of guaranteeing the effect of denoising, which has been widely paid attention by researchers. However, due to the limited receptive field of convolution operation, it is difficult to model global context, which limits the space for further improvement of network model and is not conducive to enhanced speech recovery.
In order to solve the above problem, this thesis focuses on improving the ability of convolutional network to obtain long-range correlation by the attention mechanism and help convolutional network further improve the performance of speech enhancement. This thesis proposes an attention- augmented fully convolutional neural network (AAUNet) for monaural speech enhancement, integrates a new two-dimensional relative selfattention mechanism into UNet. The specific method is to concatenate the outputs of the convolution operation and the proposed attention mechanism in the channel direction to develop a new feature map.This feature permits it to flexibly adjust the proportion of attention channels, finding the optimal combination of convolution learning local details and self-attention acquiring the global context. The experimental results show that AAUNet surpasses all the contrast methods under various unknown noises and SNR conditions, and improves the denoising ability.
However, this thesis finds that the performance of speech enhancement decreases when the percentage of channels of attention mechanism is 100%. To solve this problem, we propose another speech enhancement model based on stand-alone self-attention mechanism (SAUNet). The stand-alone self-attention mechanism can freely set the size of the operation region and improve the distance-based perception ability through the multi-valued matrix. The experimental results show that compared with AAUNet, SAUNet can improve the PESQ and STOI scores by 7.93% and 4.16%, respectively. With a small amount of parameters added, SAUNet can achieve significant performance improvement.
KEY WORDS:speech enhancement;fully convolutional neural network;attention mechanism
