摘要
无人机由于其灵活性好、成本低、鲁棒性强等特点，被广泛应用 在各种场景中。无人机自组网是无人机在军事和民用场景中的一大应 用，无人机自组网不依赖于基础设施，抗摧毁性强，可以灵活快速部 署，具有非常广阔的应用前景。感知通信一体化技术使得雷达通信可 以工作在同一个系统中，由多址接入控制(Multiple Access Control, MAC)协议进行调度。在MAC协议中如何调度雷达和通信的工作保 障无人机飞行安全、如何设计适用无人机网络的MAC协议并实现高 效、安全的传输及其如何实现无人机集群防碰撞是本文的主要研究的 内容。本文的研究内容如下：
1) 针对波形一体化下雷达扫描方向跟随通信方向造成无人机飞 行不安全问题及其雷达回波干扰问题，本文提出了新的雷达与通信调 度模式，并且引入了雷达回波保护间隔，在无人机MAC协议中保障 雷达与通信的正常工作，在此基础上针对无人机网络拓扑变化快、部 署范围大、节点数量大等特点，提出了一种基于预留机制的节点接入 方法并且设计了相应的信道复用模式和数据包格式。此外，为了保障 无人机安全信息的及时传输，本文为安全的数据包和业务数据包划分 不同的优先级。仿真验证了所提出的协议与动态信道分配(Dynamic Channel Assignment, DCA)协议相比在吞吐量和节点接入效率等性能 上得到了提升，并且有大量节点接入时系统更不容易受到控制信道制 约，例如在传输数据包大小为lOOOByte,四条数据信道的情况下，当 竞争接入节点数目为25时，所提出的协议在吞吐量性能上提升了 9%, 并且DCA协议在四信道时候就达到了控制信道瓶颈，而基于预留机 制的多址接入方法在六信道时才达到控制信道瓶颈。此外基于预留机 制多址接入方法能够满足紧急数据包的低时延传输，在安全信息包数 目小于8的时候，时延小于1ms。
2) 针对无人机飞行环境中障碍物类型识别及其障碍物轨迹预测 精度不高等问题。本文提出一体化感知和目标识别的方法，通过融合 通信和雷达信息提高了预测精度，而预测精度的提升可以缩短无人机 的最小反应距离，对无人机防碰撞有一定的积极意义。其次，针对路 径规划不及时造成的碰撞避免失败问题，提出了一种新的路径重新规 划算法，采取了先碰撞避免后路径重新规划的方法脱离危险。最后仿 真验证了路径重新规划算法的可行性并且与传统路径重新规划算法 相比，所提出的算法在时延性能上得到了提升，在本文实验环境下所 提出的路径重新规划算法的时延小于10so
关键词:一体化无人机网络;多址接入;三维动态障碍物环境;防碰撞
KEY TECHNOLOGIES OF NODE ACCESS FOR UAV SWARM BASED ON RADAR
AND COMMUNICATION INTEGRATION
ABSTRACT
Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is widely applied in various scenarios due to its characteristics of flexibility, low cost, strong robustness and so on. UAV Ad Hoc Network is important to support the applications of UAV in military and civil scenarios. Since UAV Ad Hoc Network does not rely on the insfrastructure, has strong anti-destruction ability, and can be deployed flexibly, it has a broad application prospect. The design of Joint radar and communication (JRC) enables radar and communication to work in the same system, which is scheduled by multiple access control (MAC) protocol. How to schedule the radar and communication in the MAC protocol to ensure the flight safety of UAV, how to design MAC protocol for UAV network to achieve efficient and secure transmission and how to realize the anti-collision of UAV swarm are the main contents of this thesis. The research contents of this thesis are as follows:
1) Facing the problem of UAV flight insecurity caused by radar scanning direction following communication direction under the signal- level integration for radar and communication, a new working mode of radar and communication scheduled in the UAV MAC method is proposed. And the radar echo protection interval is introduced to ensure that radar and communication will not interfere with each other. Based on the JRC technology, facing the characteristics of UAV network such as high mobility, large-scale deployment, and large number, a multi-channel MAC method based on reservation mechanism is proposed, and the coiTesponding channel multiplexing mode and related data packet format are designed. In addition, higher priorities are given to the emergency packets to ensure the timely transmission of UAV emergency information. The simulation results demonstrate that compared with the dynamic channel assignment (DCA) protocol, the throughput performance and node access efficiency of the proposed method are improved and the control channel is less likely to block, when there are a large number of accessing nodes. For example, when the packet size is 1000 bytes and the number of accessing nodes is 25, the throughput performance of the proposed protocol is improved by 9%, and the DCA protocol reaches the control channel bottleneck when the number of data channels is four, while the proposed method reaches the control channel bottleneck when the number of data channels is six. In addition, the proposed method can meet the low delay transmission of emergency data packets, and the delay is less than 1ms when the number of security information packets is less than 8.
2) Facing the problem of obstacle type recognition and low accuracy of obstacle trajectory prediction in UAV flight environment, we use JRC signal for detection and target recognition, and prove that in this scenario, the fusion of communication and radar infomiation can obtain better prediction accuracy. Then the simulation results demonstrate that the improvement of detection accuracy can shorten the minimum reaction distance of UAV, which has a positive effect on UAV collision avoidance. Secondly, based on the research status of UAV anti-collision algorithm, a path replanning algorithm is proposed, with which UAV escapes dangerous situations first and then uses the historical infonnation to replan the path. Finally, the simulation results prove the feasibility of the proposed algorithm and show that compared with the traditional path replanning algorithm, the proposed algorithm has better delay performance. In our simulation environment, the delay of the proposed path replanning algorithm is less than 10s.
KEY WORDS: Joint radar and communication;UAV network;multiple access control protocol;3D dynamic obstacle environment;anti-collision
